2020年2月14日外交部发言人耿爽主持网上例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Daily Briefing Online on February 14, 2020
首先向大家通报一组数字：根据中国国家卫生健康委今天上午发布的统计数字，2月13日0—24时，中国境内新增治愈出院病例1081例。
First, I’d like to share with you some figures from the National Health Commission (NHC) this morning. Between 00:00 and 24:00, February 13, altogether 1,081 cured and discharged cases were reported in China's mainland.
截至2月13日24时，中国境内累计治愈出院病例6723例。
As of 24:00 February 13, a total of 6,723 people have been cured and discharged from hospital in China's mainland.
2月13日0—24时，全国除湖北以外地区新增确诊病例267例，连续第10天呈下降态势。
Between 00:00 and 24:00, February 13, there were 267 newly reported confirmed cases in China (excluding Hubei Province), marking the 10th day of declining.
近期不少国家的驻华大使和国际组织驻华代表在社交媒体平台上发声，表示将同中国站在一起抗击新冠肺炎疫情。
Recently many foreign ambassadors and representatives to China said on social media platforms that they stand with China in this fight against the NCP (COVID-19).
这不仅体现了对中国防控疫情努力及成效的高度认可，也体现了对中国政府和人民打赢这场疫情防控阻击战的坚定信心。
It shows not only their strong recognition of China’s epidemic response but also their confidence in the Chinese government and people’s capability to defeat the virus.
下面，我与大家分享一段视频，让我们一起感受一下朋友之间的“患难真情”。
I’d like to share with you a video demonstrating true friendship that stands out in difficult times.
我想大家都看到了，在视频中，俄罗斯驻华大使祝愿中国人民健康平安、百病不侵；
In this video: The Russian ambassador to China said, “We hope the Chinese people will stay safe and sound, ward off all diseases and resume normal life as soon as possible.”
德国驻华大使表示，在艰难的日子里，德国与中国心心相连，祝愿中国人民早日战胜疫情；
The German ambassador to China said, “German people’s thoughts are with China in this challenging time and we wish the Chinese people an early victory over the epidemic.”
古巴驻华大使表示，中国朋友并不孤单，古巴和中国人民站在一起；
The Cuban ambassador to China said, “Chinese friends are not alone and the Cuban people stand with them.”
蒙古驻华大使表示，友好的中国人民将取得抗击疫情的胜利；
The Mongolian ambassador to China said, “Friendly Chinese people will win the battle against the novel coronavirus.”
伊朗驻华大使表示，相信拥有5000年文明历史的中华民族有能力战胜疫情；
The Iranian ambassador to China said, “I’m sure China, with 5000 years of civilization, will overcome this problem.”
巴西驻华大使表示，中国人民历经挑战，最终都获得了胜利，巴西对中国有信心；
The Brazilian ambassador to China said, “The Chinese people have overcome all the challenges they encountered before. Brazil has faith in China.”
法国驻华大使表示，患难见真情，法国始终与中国人民站在一起；
The French ambassador to China said, “True friends are recognized in trying times. France is by your side.”
联合国驻华协调员表示，国际社会都力挺中国，中国加油。
The UN Resident Coordinator in China said, “The international community is behind China. Zhongguo jiayou! (Stay strong, China!)”
我们赞赏各国使节以及他们各自代表的国家（组织）在危难时刻同中国站在一起。
We applaud all foreign diplomats, representatives and the countries and institutions they represent for standing with China in times of adversity.
这是人类命运共同体理念的生动体现和最好诠释。
This is a perfect demonstration of a community with a shared future for mankind.
疫情过后，历史铭记的不仅有中国人民抗疫斗争的众志成城和英勇顽强，也有各国携手应对危机的同舟共济和风雨担当。
After the epidemic, the history will remember not only the Chinese people’s courage, arduous struggle and concerted efforts, but also the spirit of countries tiding over the difficulties hand in hand.
中方愿继续同各方一道，合作应对疫情，早日战胜病魔，共同维护国际公共卫生安全，促进全人类的健康与福祉。
China will continue working with all countries to fight the epidemic, defeat it as early as possible, safeguard international public health security and contribute to the health and wellbeing of all mankind.
问：近日，上海合作组织发表声明支持中方抗击新冠肺炎疫情。
The Shanghai Cooperation Organization issued a statement in support of China’s efforts in countering the novel coronavirus pneumonia epidemic.
此前，上合组织秘书长诺罗夫也表示，上合组织国家将与中国人民团结一致，共同应对疫情。
Secretary General Vladimir Norov of the SCO also said previously that the SCO member states will stand with the Chinese people to jointly fight against the epidemic.
中方对此有何评论？
What is your comment?
答：2月14日，上合组织发表支持中方抗击新冠肺炎疫情的声明。
On February 14, the SCO issued a statement in support of China’s efforts in countering the novel coronavirus pneumonia epidemic.
声明指出，上合组织成员国欢迎中国政府和人民为抗击新冠肺炎疫情以及阻止疫情传播所采取的果断措施，愿向中方提供必要协助并开展密切合作，呼吁国际社会在世界卫生组织框架内加强协作，共同维护地区和国际公共卫生安全。
The statement said that the SCO member states welcome the decisive measures undertaken by the Chinese government and people to fight the epidemic and to stop it from spreading. The member states reaffirm their readiness to render China the necessary assistance and to closely cooperate with China. They call on the international community to step up their coordination within the World Health Organization for better public health security.
坚信各方通过协调努力和相互支持，将有效制止疫情扩散并成功战胜疫情。
The member states are convinced that coordinated joint efforts as well as mutual support will make it possible to overcome this epidemic and to contain its spreading.
上合组织是具有重要国际影响的综合性区域组织，一贯倡导成员国遵循“上海精神”，加强团结促进共同发展与繁荣，新冠肺炎疫情发生以来，合作和相互支持，携手应对新威胁新挑战。
The SCO, a comprehensive regional organization commanding major international influence, has been advocating the “Shanghai Spirit” and promoting common development and prosperity in solidarity. Since the outbreak of the epidemic, the SCO members have been cooperating with mutual support to address new threats and challenges.
上合组织各成员国领导人都发来慰问信，高度评价中方采取的有力防控举措，表示愿向中方提供支持和协助。
Leaders of the SCO member states have all sent messages of condolences in which they spoke highly of China’s forceful measures and expressed their readiness to provide support and assistance.
上合组织发表声明，再次体现了成员国安危与共、守望相助的良好传统。
The SCO statement once again showcased the fine tradition of the member states sharing weal and woe through thick and thin.
中方愿继续同包括上合组织成员国在内的国际社会密切合作，共同抗击疫情，维护地区和全球公共卫生安全。
China will continue to closely cooperate with the international community, including the SCO member states, to mount a joint response against the epidemic and uphold regional and global public health security.
问：近日，美国国务卿蓬佩奥接受福克斯商业频道采访时再次提及中国对美进行渗透，称这是中国共产党干的事情，但我们热爱中国人民。
US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo again talked about Chinese infiltration in the US during a recent interview with FOX Business. He said it is what the Chinese Communist Party is doing, while the Americans love the Chinese people.
中国驻美使领馆参与对美渗透。
He also talked about Chinese diplomatic missions’ engagement in so-called infiltration.
中方对此有何评论？
I wonder if you have any comment?
答：我前几天已经对蓬佩奥在美国全国州长协会会议上的讲话作出回应。
I responded to Mr. Pompeo’s speech to the National Governors Association the other day.

His latest remarks are a mere repetition of the old tune.
他的这一最新言论纯属老调重弹，继续全然不顾中美关系的历史和现实，通篇充斥冷战思维和政治偏见，中方对此坚决反对。
In a renewed disregard for the actual course of China-US relations, he has exposed once again his Cold-War mentality and political prejudice, which we firmly oppose.
这里我只简单讲几点：
Here I’ll give you some plain facts.
第一，中方始终坚持不干涉他国内政原则。
First, China adheres to the principle of non-interference in other countries’ internal affairs.
中国驻美使领馆和各类社会团体按照国际法和中美双边协议行事，与美各级政府交往都是为了促进两国相互了解、交流与合作，合理合法、光明磊落、无可非议。
China’s diplomatic missions and civil groups in the US observe international law and bilateral agreements. Their interactions with the US governments at all levels are to promote mutual understanding, exchanges and cooperation, thus legitimate, lawful, open and aboveboard, and beyond reproach.
第二，中国走的是中国特色社会主义道路，中国共产党的领导是中国特色社会主义最本质的特征，这是历史和人民的选择。
Second, China follows the path of socialism with Chinese characteristics, and the leadership of the CPC is a defining feature. This path is a historical choice made by the Chinese people.
任何妄图挑拨中国人民同中国共产党关系的图谋都是徒劳的。
Anyone seeking to sow discord between the Chinese people and the CPC should know that their attempts will prove to be in vain.
第三，中美建交40多年来，两国关系尽管经历波折，但总体向前发展，给两国人民带来了实实在在的利益。
Third, since diplomatic ties were established more than 40 years ago, China-US relations have generally moved forward despite some trials and turbulence, bringing tangible benefits to the two peoples.
一个健康稳定的中美关系符合两国利益，也是国际社会共同期待。
A sound and stable bilateral relationship serves the interests of both countries and is what the international community wants to see.
最后，我们奉劝美方个别人摒弃冷战思维和意识形态偏见，停止诬蔑中国政治制度，停止做干扰破坏两国正常交往合作的事情。
Finally, we advise certain people in the US to step out of their Cold War mindset and ideological prejudices, stop discrediting China’s political system, and stop undermining bilateral exchange and cooperation.
问：关于新冠肺炎疫情的问题。
A question about the NCP.
美国白宫国家经济委员会主任库德洛昨日表示，美方对中方未邀请美参与、中方缺乏透明度感到有些失望。
US National Economic Council director Larry Kudlow said yesterday that they’re disappointed that they haven't been invited in and they're also disappointed in the lack of transparency coming from the Chinese.
美方非常愿意与世界卫生组织共同帮助中方防控疫情，但中方未允许。
He added that “We're more than willing to work with the WHO on this and they won't let us”.
中方对此有何回应？
Do you have any response to this?
答：疫情发生以来，中方本着公开、透明及对全球公共卫生安全和人民健康高度负责的态度，与国际社会携手应对疫情。
China has been working with the international community to tackle the epidemic in an open, transparent and highly responsible manner for the sake of global public health security and all people’s health since the outbreak.
中方对同美方开展合作一直持积极、开放态度。
China has been active and open towards cooperation with the US.
疫情发生以来，中美卫生健康部门保持密切政策沟通，及时相互通报疫情信息，部长间以通话、通信等方式就疫情防控开展交流；中美疾控、医学科研技术部门及中美科学家也一直保持多种形式的技术交流；
Since the epidemic broke out, the health authorities of the two sides have been in close communication on policies, timely exchanging information on the epidemic, with the heads of the departments having talks through phone calls and messages. Chinese and American departments of disease control, medical R&D and technology as well as scientists have also been engaging in various forms of exchanges.
我们欢迎包括美方在内的多国专家参加中国—世卫组织联合专家考察组。
We welcome foreign experts’ participation in the China-WHO Joint Mission, including those from the US.
美国总统特朗普和美国卫生部长阿扎在多个场合对中方在疫情防控中的透明姿态表示赞赏。
US President Trump and US Secretary of Health Alex Azar commended China’s transparent handling of the epidemic on many occasions.
中方将继续与包括美国在内的国际社会携手应对疫情，维护全球公共卫生安全。
China will continue working with the international community, including the US, to jointly tackle the epidemic and uphold global health security.
问：有媒体报道，中共中央政治局委员、中央外事工作委员会办公室主任杨洁篪将于本月28、29日访问日本，你能否确认？
Some media reports say State Councilor Yang Jiechi will visit Japan from February 28 to 29. Can you confirm this?
此访的主要议程有哪些？
What will be on his agenda?
答：目前我没有可以向你提供的信息。
I have nothing to offer you at the moment.
问：美国白宫国家经济委员会主任库德洛称，对中方抗击疫情过程中缺乏透明度感到有些失望。
White House economic advisor Larry Kudlow said the US is disappointed at China for a lack of transparency in its response to the current coronavirus outbreak.
中方对此有何回应？
Does China have a response?
答：我刚才已经回答了法新社的类似提问，请你查阅。
Please refer to my earlier reply to the AFP.
问：13日，欧盟卫生部长紧急会议同意加强准备并采取协调行动，防止疫情进一步在欧洲蔓延。
Following a special meeting in Brussels on February 13, EU health ministers agreed to increase preparations and coordination to prevent the virus from spreading across Europe.
欧盟委员会卫生和食品安全委员基里亚基德斯称，目前形势不需要禁止中国游客进入免签证的申根区，应对欧盟成员国和中国采取的防控措施持积极态度。
EU Health Commissioner Stella Kyriakides said that the EU does not consider banning Chinese travelers from entering its visa-free Schengen area at the moment and they should be positive in that the measures being taken by member states and China contain the virus.
中方对此有何评论?
Do you have comments on that?
答：我们注意到有关报道，对欧盟卫生部长紧急会议关于不需要禁止中国游客进入申根区的结论表示欢迎。
We have noted relevant reports and we welcome the agreement reached by EU health ministers at the emergency meeting that they see no need to ban Chinese travelers from entering Schengen area.
同时我也想强调，防疫无国界，面对疫情，国际社会需加强协调合作，共同积极应对。
I also want to stress that the international community needs to enhance coordination and cooperation to make a collective response to the epidemic as the virus knows no borders.
希望有关国家能够保持镇定，科学研判，理性应对，不作过度反应，尊重世界卫生组织的权威意见。
We hope relevant countries will stay calm, make science-based assessment and rational response, and respect WHO’s authoritative recommendations.
疫情爆发以来，中欧双方始终保持着密切的沟通与合作，我们对来自欧盟及其成员国对中国抗击疫情的支持和帮助表示衷心感谢。
Since the outbreak of the epidemic, China and the EU have been in close communication and cooperation. We want to express our heartfelt thanks to the EU and its member states for their support and assistance.
中方将继续本着公开、透明、负责任态度，同世界卫生组织和国际社会加强沟通，合作应对疫情，早日取得抗击疫情的胜利。
We will continue with our exchange of information and cooperation with the WHO and the international community in an open, transparent and responsible way and strive to achieve the victory against the epidemic as soon as possible.
问：美国政府以涉嫌敲诈和密谋窃取商业机密为由，对华为发起新一轮指控。中方对此有何评论？
What is China's response to new indictments unveiled against Huawei by the U.S. government of racketeering and conspiracy to steal trade secrets?
答：我注意到有关报道，也注意到华为公司已作出回应。
I noted the reports and Huawei’s response.
我要再次强调，中国政府一贯鼓励中国企业按照市场原则和国际规则，在遵守当地法律的基础上开展对外经济合作。
I need to reemphasize that the Chinese government encourages Chinese enterprises to conduct overseas business cooperation in accordance with local laws, the market principle and international rules.
美方一段时间以来在拿不出任何证据的情况下，滥用国家力量，无理打压特定中国企业，既不道德，也不光彩，有失一个大国的水准。
The US has been misusing its national power to oppress specific Chinese companies with no proof of any wrongdoing. Such practice is disgraceful and immoral, and it is beneath the status of the US as a major country.
这种经济霸凌行径是对美方自己一贯标榜的市场经济原则的公然否定，严重损害美国自身信誉和形象，也将损害美国企业的利益。
Such economic bullying practice is a blatant denial of the market principle, for which the US has been a self-claimed champion. It severely undermines the reputation and credibility of the US, as well as the interests of American companies.
我们敦促美方立即停止对中国企业的无理打压。
We urge the US to immediately stop oppressing Chinese businesses.
问：你能否透露截至目前有多少国家的政府向中方提供抗疫援助物资?
Can you tell us how many foreign governments have provided assistance to China so far?
答：面对疫情，中方主要依靠自身的力量应对，我们对此有信心、有能力。
China mainly relies on its own strength to tackle the epidemic. We are confident and capable of doing this.
同时，对于来自国际社会，特别是来自其他发展中国家的真诚友善的支持和帮助，我们都表示欢迎和感谢。
In the meantime, we welcome and thank the international community, the developing countries in particular, for their sincere support and friendly assistance.
根据我们从外交渠道掌握的情况，截至2月14日中午12时，已有33个国家政府和4个国际组织向中方提供了疫情防控医疗物资，包括：阿尔及利亚、澳大利亚、白俄罗斯、柬埔寨、加拿大、埃及、法国、德国、加纳、匈牙利、印度尼西亚、伊朗、意大利、日本、韩国、哈萨克斯坦、马来西亚、尼泊尔、新西兰、巴基斯坦、菲律宾、俄罗斯、新加坡、苏里南、塔吉克斯坦、泰国、特立尼达和多巴哥、土耳其、阿联酋、英国、美国、乌兹别克斯坦、越南，欧盟、联合国儿童基金会、联合国开发计划署、国际移民组织。
According to what we have learned from diplomatic channels, as of 12 p.m. February 14, altogether 33 foreign governments and 4 international organizations have provided China with medical supplies. They are: Algeria, Australia, Belarus, Cambodia, Canada, Egypt, France, Germany, Ghana, Hungary, Indonesia, Iran, Italy, Japan, the Republic of Korea, Kazakhstan, Malaysia, Nepal, New Zealand, Pakistan, the Philippines, Russia, Singapore, Suriname, Tajikistan, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom, the United States, Uzbekistan, Vietnam, the European Union, UNICEF, UNDP and the International Organization for Migration.
有17个国家政府和1个国际组织宣布将向中方提供相关医疗物资，包括：奥地利、巴西、刚果（布）、哥斯达黎加、捷克、丹麦、厄瓜多尔、爱沙尼亚、肯尼亚、吉尔吉斯斯坦、拉脱维亚、挪威、巴勒斯坦、卡塔尔、沙特阿拉伯、塞尔维亚、斯洛文尼亚，联合国人口基金。
A total of 17 foreign governments and 1 international organization announced that they will offer medical supplies to China. They are: Austria, Brazil, the Republic of Congo, Costa Rica, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, Estonia, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Norway, Palestine, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Slovenia and the United Nations Population Fund.
此外，智利、赤道几内亚、朝鲜、马尔代夫、蒙古、缅甸、瓦努阿图等国政府和联合国驻华机构也向中方提供了其他形式的资金和物质支持。
In addition, Chile, Equatorial Guinea, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, the Maldives, Mongolia, Myanmar, Vanuatu have also offered China financial and material support in other means.
很多国家社会各界友好人士、华侨华人、中资企业、中国留学生等也通过各种方式提供了大量支持。
Friendly people in many countries, overseas Chinese firms and Chinese community including students have also provided a lot of support in various ways.
2020年2月13日外交部发言人耿爽主持网上例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Daily Briefing Online on February 13, 2020
首先向大家通报一组数字：根据中国国家卫生健康委今天发布的统计数字，2月12日0—24时，中国境内新增治愈出院病例1171例。
First, I'd like to share with you some figures from the National Health Commission (NHC). Between 00:00 and 24:00, February 12, altogether 1,171 cured and discharged cases were reported in China's mainland.
截至2月12日24时，中国境内累计治愈出院病例5911例。
As of 24:00 February 12, a total of 5,911 people have been cured and discharged from hospital in China's mainland.
2月12日0—24时，全国除湖北以外地区新增确诊病例312例，连续第9天呈下降态势。
Between 00:00 and 24:00, February 12, there were 312 newly reported confirmed cases in China (excluding Hubei Province), marking the ninth day of declining.
问：你能否介绍在华外国人感染新冠肺炎的最新情况？有多少人确诊？其中有多少在武汉？他们现状如何？
Can you please update us on the infected foreigners in China- how many are there in total, how many are in Wuhan and what is their condition?
答：据向有关部门了解，目前在华外国人确诊患新冠肺炎病例数量无变化，治愈出院人数从7人增至8人。
After checking with the competent authorities, the number of confirmed cases of foreign nationals in China stays the same, while that of cured and discharged cases has risen from 7 to 8.
问：近日，意大利那不勒斯市青年人发起“拥抱中国人”的快闪活动，很多民众参与其中，呼吁人们抵制歧视。
Recently a flash mob hugged Chinese in Naples, Italy to call for no discrimination. Those young men and women were joined by a lot of people there.
东京街头一名身穿中国旗袍的日本女孩号召民众为武汉捐款，并表示“可怕的是病毒，不是中国”。
There was also a Japanese girl wearing cheongsam on a Tokyo street, calling on people to donate for Wuhan and saying "What's horrible is the virus, not China."
这些视频在社交媒体平台上有超大量的浏览。
We found videos of them on social networks which have a huge number of online viewers.
请问发言人是否看过？如何评价各国民众特别是青少年的这些倡议和举动？
I was wondering if you watched them and how do you see such words and deeds by foreign nationals especially the youth?
答：我和我的同事看到了你提到的这些视频。除此之外，我们还看到英国中学生合唱中文歌曲《让世界充满爱》，看到德国青年们用“I am China”的口号呼吁全球共同抗击疫情，看到埃塞俄比亚学生用中文祝福“中国加油”......
My colleagues and I watched the videos you mentioned and others, including the ones where British high school students sang the Chinese song of Fill the World with Love, young men and women in Germany chanted "I am China" to encourage global efforts in fighting the virus, and Ethiopian students called "Stay strong, China" in Chinese.
我们为这些暖心视频点赞，对各国民众特别是青少年自发举动展现出的正直、善良、勇气和爱心表示高度赞赏和由衷感谢。
We give "thumbs up" to these heartwarming videos. We commend and thank all those people across the world - especially the youth - for the integrity, kindness, courage and compassion that they demonstrate in their voluntary acts.
一段时间以来，联合国秘书长、世界卫生组织总干事等国际机构负责人和多国政要都公开呼吁，应对新冠肺炎疫情应避免歧视、污名化和过度反应。
The UN Secretary General, WHO Director-General and many high-level officials of international institutions and foreign governments have openly called for no discrimination, no stigmatization and no overreaction recently.
很多国家的民众特别是青少年通过自发的举动呼唤良知与正义，抵制偏见与不公，传递信心与力量，对中国人民的抗疫斗争给予了道义上的声援和精神上的支持。
People in many countries, particularly the young people, are taking real actions to endorse conscience and justice, reject prejudice and injustice, and pass on confidence and strength. They have given the Chinese people moral and spiritual support.
疫情无情人有情，患难时刻见真情。
Ruthless virus brings out warmth in humanity, and true friendship stands the test of adversity.
我们坚信，真善终将克服隔膜，关爱终将战胜恐慌，在世界人民的理解支持之下，中国人民一定能够取得抗击疫情的最终胜利。
We believe sincerity and kindness will overcome estrangement, while care and compassion will not be shadowed by panic and fear. With the understanding and support from the international community, the Chinese people will surely defeat the epidemic in the end.
让我们一起加油！
Let us stay strong!
问：湖北省确诊新冠肺炎病例的最新方法是否得到世卫组织认可？
Is the new methodology used by Hubei in determining confirmed cases today approved by the WHO?
答：建议你向主管部门询问。
I'll leave that to the competent authorities.
问：据报道，台湾疾病预防控制中心禁止非台湾居民入台，已在台相关人员可以每次申请延长停留期15天。
Taiwan CDC has banned those who are not residents of the Taiwan region from entering Taiwan while those who are there can apply to extend their stay for 15 days each time.
中方对此有何评论？有多少人会受到影响？
Can the foreign ministry comment on this? How many such individuals are affected?
答：这次疫情发生后，从对台湾同胞生命安全和身体健康高度负责的角度出发，国家卫健委及时向台湾地区通报疫情防控最新信息，加强海峡两岸对疫情的共同应对。
Since the outbreak of the epidemic, the National Health Commission, attaching high importance to Taiwan compatriots' safety and health, has kept the region informed with timely updates with a view to strengthening cross-strait response to the epidemic.
据了解，目前两岸一直就疫情防控保持着沟通。
As we understand, the mainland and the Taiwan region have been in communication on it.
至于你关心的具体问题，建议你向主管部门询问。
I refer you to the competent authorities for the details you are interested in.
问：有一个关于滞留武汉外国人的中国籍配偶的问题。
Regarding the Chinese spouses of stranded foreign nationals in Wuhan.
此前，外交部曾表示，允许这些中国籍配偶离开武汉。
The foreign ministry said that they were allowed to leave Wuhan.
那么，非外国人的配偶但是拥有日本或其他国家永久居留权的中国公民，是否被允许离开武汉？如果不允许，理由是什么？
I'd like to confirm that, for those Chinese nationals who are not the spouses of foreigners but have permanent residency in Japan or other countries, are they allowed to leave Wuhan? If not, why?
答：我能告诉你的是，对于外国在武汉公民的中国籍直系家属，考虑到家庭因素，如其本人愿意，可以随家人一同乘机离开。
What I can tell you is that for Chinese nationals who are lineal relatives of foreign citizens in Wuhan, in light of their family ties, if they want to leave, they can leave with their families by air.
其他情况我不掌握。
I have nothing further at hand at the moment.
问：我们现在只看到了湖北省的最新确诊数字，中方是否将公布其他省份的情况？
We only know by now about new confirmed cases in Hubei. Are you releasing information for the other provinces soon?
答：请你等待主管部门的权威发布。
I'd refer you to the authoritative update from the competent department.
问：第一个问题，湖北省确诊新冠肺炎病例的最新方法是否会在全国普及应用？
First, will Hubei's new counting methodology of confirmed cases be implemented in the rest of the country?
第二个问题，世卫组织的先遣组是否已经在武汉，还是将赴武汉？
Second, is the WHO advance mission in Wuhan now or visiting Wuhan soon?
第三个问题，如果湖北省医疗资源持续不足，湖北省确诊病患是否会被转移到其他省份治疗？
Third, if medical facilities in Hubei continue to be overwhelmed, is it possible that confirmed COVID-19 cases from Hubei could be sent to hospitals in other provinces for treatment?
答：关于第一个问题，建议你向主管部门询问。
On your first question, I'll leave that to the competent authorities.
关于第二个问题，据我了解，中方有关部门正在同世卫组织先遣组商谈中国—世卫组织联合专家考察组具体安排。
On your second question, as I know, the Chinese side is discussing the specific arrangements on the China-WHO joint mission with the WHO advance team.
详细情况你可以向他们去询问。
I'd refer you to them for the details.
关于第三个问题，建议你向主管部门询问。
On your third question, I'll still leave that to the competent authorities.
问：世卫组织先遣组此次来华的目的是什么？
Regarding the WHO advance team, what's the purpose of the visit?
双方期待达成什么成果？先遣组将在华停留多久？
What do both sides hope to see accomplished? And how long will the team be in China?
答：先遣组此次来华是与中方有关部门就中国—世卫组织联合专家考察组的具体安排进行商谈。
The advance team is here to discuss specific arrangements for the China-WHO joint mission with the Chinese side.
联合专家考察组的主要目的，是双方专家就疫情形势和防控情况进行深入交流，为中国及全球各疫情国下一步共同努力开展疫情防控提供意见建议。
The purpose of the joint mission is that experts of both sides can have in-depth communication on the situation and efforts of prevention and control, and come up with advice for China and other affected countries.
具体问题建议你向主管部门询问。
I'll leave the specifics to the competent authorities.
2020年2月12日外交部发言人耿爽主持网上例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Daily Briefing Online on February 12, 2020
应慕尼黑安全会议主席伊辛格和德国外长马斯邀请，王毅国务委员兼外长将于2月13日至15日赴德国出席第56届慕尼黑安全会议，之前还将同马斯外长共同举行第五轮中德外交与安全战略对话。
Invited by Chairman Wolfgang Ischinger of the Munich Security Conference (MSC) and Foreign Minister Heiko Maas of Germany, State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi will travel to Germany to attend the 56th MSC and co-chair the 5th round of China-Germany strategic dialogue on diplomacy and security with Foreign Minister Maas from February 13 to 15.
向大家通报一组数字：根据中国国家卫生健康委今天上午发布的统计数字，2月11日0—24时，中国境内新增治愈出院病例744例。
I'd like to share with you some figures from the National Health Commission (NHC) this morning. Between 00:00 and 24:00, February 11, altogether 744 cured and discharged cases were reported in China's mainland.
截至2月11日24时，中国境内累计治愈出院病例4740例。
As of 24:00 February 11, a total of 4,740 people have been cured and discharged from hospital in China's mainland.
2月11日0—24时，全国除湖北以外地区新增确诊病例377例，连续第8天呈下降态势。
Between 00:00 and 24:00, February 11, there were 377 newly reported confirmed cases in China (excluding Hubei Province), marking the eighth day of declining.
问：你能否介绍王毅国务委员兼外长出席慕尼黑安全会议的有关安排？
Could you share more details on State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi's attendance at the MSC?
答：慕尼黑安全会议是外交和战略安全领域的重要国际论坛。
The Munich Security Conference is an important international forum on diplomatic and strategic security.
王毅国务委员兼外长此次与会将应约发表主旨演讲，回应国际社会的高度关注，介绍中国政府和人民众志成城、万众一心奋力抗击新冠肺炎疫情的努力和成效，推动共同应对疫情的国际合作，相信会得到国际社会的更深入理解和更全面支持。
At the MSC, State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi will deliver a keynote speech in response to the world's high attention. He will talk about the Chinese government and people's concerted efforts and progress in fighting against the novel coronavirus pneumonia, and about advancing international cooperation in this regard. We believe we will get deeper understanding and broader support from the international community.
王毅还将围绕会议主题，重点就当前人类社会面临的各种全球性挑战阐明中国坚持多边主义、深化国际合作的看法和主张。
Focusing on current global challenges faced by mankind, State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi will speak of China's perspectives and proposals on upholding multilateralism and deepening international cooperation under the theme of the conference.
此外，王毅国务委员兼外长将同与会国家政要和国际组织负责人举行双边会见，同各方加强沟通交流。
He will also have bilateral meetings with foreign representatives and officials of international organizations.
问：关于中德外交与安全战略对话，你能否介绍更多情况？双方将讨论哪些议题？
Could you talk a little more about China-Germany strategic dialogue on diplomacy and security? What will be discussed?
答：中德外交与安全战略对话是2014年建立的两国外长机制性对话磋商，为增进政治互信、推动务实合作发挥了重要积极作用。
China-Germany strategic dialogue on diplomacy and security is a foreign minister-level mechanism for dialogue and consultation established in 2014, which has played an important role in boosting mutual political trust and practical cooperation.
本次第5轮对话将在德国柏林举行。
The upcoming fifth round will be held in Berlin, Germany.
王毅国务委员兼外长将同德国外长马斯就中德、中欧关系、共同维护多边主义和自由贸易以及国际和地区热点问题进行深入沟通。
State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi and Foreign Minister Heiko Maas will have in-depth discussions on China-Germany relations, China-EU ties, joint efforts to uphold multilateralism and free trade, as well as regional and international hotspot issues.
王毅国务委员兼外长还将与德国领导人会见。
State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang will also meet with German leaders.
当前形势下，新冠肺炎疫情的防控将是王毅国务委员和德方领导人交流的重要议题，双方将就此进一步交流情况并探讨开展疫情防控和公共卫生领域的合作，为中方抗击疫情提供更多国际支持。
Under the current circumstances, China's epidemic prevention and control measures will be an important topic in their talks. Both sides will have discussions on the latest situation and cooperation in epidemic control and public health, which will help China get more international support in this area.
中方始终高度重视发展同德国的关系。
China attaches high importance to its relations with Germany.
今年中德、中欧有多项重要政治议程，中方期待通过本轮外交与安全战略对话，进一步增进双方战略沟通和互信，推动中德全方位战略伙伴关系在新的一年取得新发展，并为中欧重要活动预作准备。
With many important items on the political agenda in China-Germany and China-EU relations this year, we hope this round of dialogue will help to enhance strategic communication and mutual trust between China and Germany, achieve more progress in our all-round strategic partnership, and prepare the ground for major events scheduled between China and EU.
问：据报道，11日，针对欧盟指责柬埔寨镇压反对派、非政府组织和媒体，并威胁剥夺柬“除武器外一切商品”（EBA)优惠关税待遇，柬首相洪森称，将不会屈从于欧盟的要求，呼吁民众保护柬的独立、主权与和平。
The EU warned Cambodia that it would withdraw the Everything But Arms (EBA) preferential trade status for Cambodia, citing the latter's oppression over the opposition, NGOs and media. On February 11, Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Sen said the country does not bow to EU's pressure and called on his people to protect Cambodia's independence, sovereignty and peace.
中方对此有何评论?
Do you have a comment on that?
答：中方一贯秉持不干涉内政原则。我们反对利用贸易手段干涉他国内政。
China adheres to the principle of non-interference in other countries' internal affairs and opposes using trade measures to interfere.
中方支持柬埔寨政府和人民维护主权独立和国家尊严的努力，愿为柬实现稳定发展和民生改善提供积极帮助，也希望国际社会为此多作建设性贡献。
We support the Cambodian government and people in upholding their country's sovereignty, independence and dignity and stand ready to help Cambodia realize steady development and improve its people's well-being. We hope that the international community can also make more constructive contributions in this regard.
问：习近平主席同印尼总统佐科于昨晚通电话。
Chinese President Xi Jinping spoke over phone with Indonesian President Joko Widodo on Tuesday night.
你能否介绍更多情况？
Would you like to share with us further information about it?
如何看待未来双边关系发展？
What do you expect of the bilateral relations in the future?
答：关于两国元首通话情况，昨天新闻稿的内容已经非常充分。
There was a detailed press release issued yesterday on the phone call between the two heads of state.
我想这次通话释放了几个重要信息:
I think there are several key messages:
一是双方都高度重视两国关系。
First, both sides attach high importance to bilateral relations with each other.
中国印尼作为全面战略伙伴，作为发展中大国，加强双边合作对两国、本地区和全球都有重要意义。
As China and Indonesia are comprehensive strategic partners and developing countries, greater cooperation between the two is important to both countries, the region and beyond.
这是两国的一贯共识。
This is a consensus.
二是双方将合力应对新冠肺炎疫情。
Second, we will work together to fight the epidemic.
面对大灾大难，无论是之前的印度洋海啸，还是汶川地震，中国和印尼都给予对方大力支持和帮助。
When faced with natural disasters such as the Indian Ocean tsunami and the earthquake in Wenchuan, China and Indonesia always give each other strong support and assistance.
此次疫情发生以来，印尼也向中方提供了急需的支持和帮助，中方也给予在华印尼公民关心和照顾。
After this epidemic broke out, Indonesia provided China with much needed support and assistance. The Indonesian nationals in China also received care and attention from us.
双方都认为当前形势下加强疫情防护合作有利于维护两国、地区和全球的公共卫生安全。
Both sides believe greater cooperation in epidemic control will help safeguard public health security in both countries, the region and the world.
三是双方将合力维护双边交往合作。
Third, the two sides will jointly uphold bilateral exchange and cooperation.
双方都有意愿最大限度减少疫情对双边关系的影响。
We are ready to minimize the impact of the epidemic on bilateral relations.
面对疫情，我们的交流不能断，合作不能停，为两国人民谋福祉的努力也不能止步。
We cannot cut exchange and ties between us, and our efforts to seek more benefits for our peoples cannot stop.
今年是两国建交70周年，我相信在两国元首的引领下，两国人民守望相助，中国印尼之间的友谊与合作一定会进一步深化，两国关系将像两国元首期待的那样，更上一层楼。
This year marks the 70th anniversary of establishment of diplomatic ties between China and Indonesia. Under the guidance of the two heads of state, I believe our peoples will continue helping each other and our friendship and cooperation will become even deeper. China-Indonesia ties will grow stronger just as our leaders expect.
问：11日，金砖主席国俄罗斯发表主席声明，代表金砖国家对中国抗击新型冠状病毒肺炎疫情的努力表示支持。
On February 11, Russia issued a BRICS Chairmanship Statement in support of China's efforts against the epidemic outbreak on behalf of all BRICS countries.
中方对此有何评论？
Can I have your comment on that?
答：11日，金砖主席国俄罗斯发表主席声明，代表金砖国家对中国抗击新型冠状病毒肺炎疫情的努力表示支持。
The Russian BRICS Chairmanship Statement on the Novel Coronavirus Pneumonia Epidemic Outbreak in China issued on February 11 expresses support to China's fight against the epidemic on behalf of the BRICS countries.
声明指出，金砖国家支持中国政府全力抗击新冠肺炎疫情，愿同中方密切合作。
It says that the BRICS countries support the firm commitment and decisive efforts of the Chinese government to combat the novel coronavirus pneumonia epidemic.
金砖国家呼吁国际社会在世界卫生组织框架下加强合作，协作应对疫情，维护全球和地区公共卫生安全。
The BRICS countries are ready to cooperate closely with China and call on the international community to strengthen cooperation and coordination within the WHO framework to protect regional and global public health security.
强调金砖国家致力于本着负责和团结合作精神，共同努力尽快控制疫情。
It stresses that the BRICS countries commit to work together in a spirit of responsibility, solidarity and cooperation to bring this outbreak under control as fast as possible.
在应对疫情时应避免歧视、污名化和过度反应。
They underline the importance of avoiding discrimination, stigmatization and overreaction while responding to the outbreak.
支持就威胁公共卫生的传染病加强科研合作。
They support strengthening of scientific research cooperation in infectious diseases that pose threat to public health.
金砖国家都是重要的新兴市场和发展中国家，也是中国的重要伙伴。
The BRICS countries are all major emerging markets and developing countries. They are also important partners for China.
在此关键时刻，金砖国家发表主席声明，发出积极、正面、建设性的声音，支持中国抗击疫情，呼吁国际社会加强合作，共同维护全球和地区公共卫生安全。
This Statement delivers positive and constructive messages, voices support for China's efforts and calls for greater international cooperation in safeguarding public health security.
这体现了金砖国家守望相助、共克时艰的精神，体现了国际社会对中国抗击疫情的支持。
At this critical stage, the Statement demonstrates the BRICS spirit of helping each other during difficult times. It is also an epitome of the support China has received from the international community.
中方对此表示高度赞赏。
We highly appreciate it.
我们也愿继续与包括金砖国家在内的国际社会全力合作，共同抗击疫情，维护地区和全球的公共卫生安全。
We will continue to work with the international community including the BRICS countries to combat the epidemic and safeguard regional and global public health security.
问：据报道，欧盟27个成员国卫生部长将于13日就新冠肺炎疫情举行特别会议，讨论协调各成员国行动。
Health ministers of the 27 EU member states will hold a special meeting on the NCP epidemic on February 13 to coordinate action.
欧委会上月拨款1000万美元用于研究该病毒，欧盟将继续为中国抗击疫情提供援助。
Last month the European Commission allocated 10 million US dollars for research on the virus. The EU will continue to offer assistance to China in combating the epidemic.
中方对此有何评论?
I wonder if you have a comment?
答：我们注意到有关报道，也注意到欧盟危机管理委员强调当前的重点是要加强国际社会团结，共同合作应对疫情。
We note relevant reports. The EU crisis management commissioner also stressed the importance for the entire international community to maintain solidarity and jointly respond to the virus.
防疫无国界。
Epidemic prevention and control goes beyond border.
面对疫情，国际社会应加强沟通协调，合力应对。
Stronger communication, coordination and cooperation is needed to win this fight.
希望有关国家能够保持镇定，科学研判，理性对待，听取世界卫生组织的权威意见。
We hope relevant countries will remain cool-headed, make science-based assessment and rational responses, and heed WHO recommendations.
与此同时，我们对来自于包括欧盟在内的国际社会对中国抗击疫情的支持和帮助表示衷心感谢。
Our thanks go to the international community including the EU for their support and assistance.
中方愿继续本着公开、透明、负责任态度，同世界卫生组织及国际社会加强沟通，合作应对疫情，早日战胜病魔。
To defeat the virus as early as possible, China will continue to enhance communication and cooperation with the WHO and the world in an open, transparent and responsible manner.
问：美国总统国家安全事务助理奥布莱恩在美国大西洋理事会演讲时表示，美国退出《中导条约》，加大军费投入，美可能于近期要求俄、中共同就削减核武器问题进行谈判。
US National Security Adviser Robert O'Brien said to the Atlantic Council in Washington that the US withdrawal from the INF treaty, combined with new investments in the Defense Department, may bring Russia and China to negotiating table for discussions on nuclear arms reductions in the coming months.
他还指出，中国无意参加军控谈判，这不令人意外，北京“很有钱”，正在大力推进国防力量现代化。
He also said it's not surprising that China does not intend to join arms control negotiations, as the wealthy country is modernizing its arms force.
中方对此有何评论？
I wonder if you have a comment?
答：关于这个问题，我们已经讲了很多次。
I have responded to this question many times.
中方无意参加所谓的“中美俄三边军控谈判”，这一立场十分明确，得到了包括俄罗斯在内的国际社会的广泛理解。
China has no intention of joining the so-called trilateral arms control negotiations with the US and Russia. This position is clear and understood by Russia and the wider international community.
需要指出的是，作为世界上拥有最大和最先进核武库的国家，美国应切实履行其核裁军特殊责任，回应俄罗斯有关延长新《削减进攻性战略武器条约》的呼吁，并进一步削减其庞大的核武库，为其他核武器国家加入多边核裁军谈判创造条件。
It is worth pointing out that the US, sitting on the largest arsenal of the most advanced nuclear weapons, should earnestly fulfill its special responsibility in nuclear disarmament, respond to Russia's call to extend the New START, and further cut down its massive nuclear arsenal, thus creating conditions for other nuclear- weapon states to join multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations.
中方一贯致力于维护全球和平、安全与稳定，致力于维护国际军控与防扩散体系，这一点国际社会有目共睹。
China is committed to preserving world peace, security and stability and upholding international arms control and non-proliferation regime, a position well known by the international community.
中方愿与各方一道，继续在裁军谈判会议、五核国机制等框架内加强沟通与协作，就事关全球战略稳定的广泛议题进行讨论，切实维护多边主义和多边裁军机制，维护基于国际法的国际秩序，维护现有军控与防扩散法律体系的权威性和有效性，为国际和平安全作出积极贡献。
China stands ready to work with all parties to strengthen communication and coordination within such frameworks as the Conference on Disarmament and the mechanism of five nuclear-weapon states, discuss a wide range of issues concerning global strategic stability, earnestly safeguard multilateralism and multilateral disarmament mechanisms, uphold the international order based on international law, defend the authority and efficacy of existing arms control and non-proliferation legal system, and make contributions to international peace and security.
关于中国国防力量现代化问题，我想指出的是，中国一贯奉行防御性的国防战略，在自身经济不断增长的基础上适度增加国防建设投入，完全是正当、合理的，不针对任何国家，也不会对任何国家构成威胁。
As for the modernization of China's national defense, I want to point out that China's national defense strategy is defensive in its nature, which has remained unchanged, and it is only reasonable and legitimate to increase input into the national defense sector proportionally as our economy keeps expanding. Such increase does not target or threaten any country.
无论从总量、占GDP和财政收入比重，还是从人均军费水平等指标看，中国军费开支都是克制和适度的。
China's military expenditure is measured and appropriate, gauged whether by its total amount, by its proportion in GDP and the fiscal revenue, or by military spending per capita.
历史地看，中国军费开支占GDP的比重总体处于下降趋势，低于北约国家2％的标准。
From a historical point of view, the ratio of China's military spending to GDP has been on the decline, which is below the 2% standard of NATO countries.
近年来，美国国防预算则持续大幅增长，2019年达到7160亿美元，约为美之后排名前十的国家军费之和，占美GDP的3.4％。
On the other hand, the US military budget has been increasing steadily and substantially in recent years. It reached $716 billion in 2019, equaling the sum of the next 10 biggest military spenders behind it and accounting for 3.4% of its GDP.
近日，美国政府向国会提交了总额约7400亿美元的2021财年国防预算案，其中仅核力量现代化申请额度就高达289亿美元。
The US government has recently submitted an about $740 billion worth of military budget request for Fiscal Year 2021 to the Congress, $28.9 billion of which will be spent to modernize its nuclear forces.
美国单边主义和穷兵黩武的做法才是国际军控进程的主要障碍，美方拿中国说事、“甩锅”的做法难以自圆其说，也不会得到国际社会的认同。
It is the US unilateralism and belligerency that poses great obstacle to the international arms control process. The US practice of shifting blames to China is not at all convincing to the world and will not be recognized.
问：加拿大外交部近日表示，加方支持中国抗击疫情的努力，并介绍了向中方提供援助的情况，表示随时准备根据需要提供进一步帮助。
The Canadian foreign ministry said recently that Canada supports China's efforts in fighting the epidemic. It talked about the assistance that Canada provided and expressed readiness to offer more.
此前，加拿大卫生部长明确表示加不会限制中国人入境。
Also, not long ago, the Canadian health minister said specifically that Canada won't impose travel restrictions on Chinese nationals.
答：中方对加拿大为中国抗击疫情提供的声援与帮助表示感谢。
Our heartfelt thanks go to Canada for its support and assistance in China's fight against the epidemic.
我们赞赏加拿大卫生部长的有关表态，这体现了加方的科学、理性态度。
We commend the statement from the Canadian health minister, which reflects Canada's science-based and rational judgment.
在此我愿重申，世界卫生组织的专业权威建议应当得到尊重，过度反应于事无补，甚至只会适得其反。
I'd like to reiterate that countries need to respect WHO's professional advice. Overreactions will only make things worse.
2020年2月11日外交部发言人耿爽主持网上例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Daily Briefing Online on February 11, 2020
首先向大家通报一组数字：根据中国国家卫生健康委今天上午发布的统计数字，2月10日0-24时，中国境内新增治愈出院病例716例。
First, I'd like to share some figures with you. According to the latest data from the National Health Commission (NHC) this morning, between 00:00 and 24:00, February 10, altogether 716 cured and discharged cases were newly reported in China's mainland.
截至2月10日24时，中国境内累计治愈出院病例3996例。
As of 24:00 February 10, a total of 3,996 people have been cured and discharged from hospital in China's mainland.
2月10日0—24时，全国除湖北以外地区新增确诊病例381例，连续第7天呈下降态势。
Between 00:00 and 24:00, February 10, there were 381 newly reported confirmed cases in China (excluding Hubei), marking the seventh day of declining.
问：第一个问题，媒体获悉的安理会对朝制裁委员会的一份报告显示，朝通过与中国船对船过驳，从国外进口石油并出口了价值3.7亿美元的煤炭，违反相关制裁决议。
First, according to a report leaked to media, which was issued to the UN Security Council North Korea sanctions committee, North Korea imported refined petroleum and exported some $370 million worth of coal with the help of Chinese barges, violating existing sanctions.
中方是否了解相关情况？第二个问题，美国本周一宣布起诉涉嫌2017年对美国信用报告机构Equifax发起黑客攻击的4名中国军方人士，称这是美有史以来最大规模黑客事件。
Was China aware of this? Second, the U.S. on Monday announced charges against four members of the Peoples Liberation Army for hacking Equifax, a credit reporting agency in 2017, in allegedly one of the largest hacking cases in US history.
中方对此有何回应？
What is China's response?
答：关于第一个问题，据我所知，联合国安理会朝鲜制裁委员会专家小组的这份年度报告还未正式对外发布，目前阶段报告内容应该是严格保密的。
On your first question, I understand this annual report by the expert panel of the UNSC 1718 Committee hasn't been officially released yet, therefore its content should be strictly confidential at this stage.
中方对这份报告被泄露表示关切，对有关新闻报道提及的内容不予评论。
China is concerned over its leakage. We offer no comment on relevant news reports.
关于第二个问题，中国政府在网络安全问题上的立场是一贯的、明确的，我们历来坚决反对并依法打击一切形式的网络黑客攻击行为。
On your second question, the Chinese government's position on cybersecurity is consistent and clear. We firmly oppose and combat cyber attacks of any kind.
中国是网络安全的坚定维护者，中国政府和军队及其相关人员从不从事或参与通过网络窃取商业秘密活动。
China is a staunch defender of cybersecurity. The Chinese government, military and relevant personnel never engage in cyber theft of trade secrets.
长期以来，美国政府和有关部门违反国际法和国际关系基本准则，对外国政府、企业和个人实施大规模、有组织、无差别的网络窃密与监听、监控，这早已是世人皆知的事实。
It has long been an open secret that the US government and relevant departments, in violation of international law and basic norms governing international relations, have been engaging in large-scale, organized and indiscriminate cyber stealing, spying and surveillance activities on foreign governments, enterprises and individuals.
从“维基解密”到“斯诺登事件”，美方在网络安全问题上的虚伪性和双重标准早已昭然若揭。
From the case of WikiLeaks to Edward Snowden, the US hypocrisy and double standard on cybersecurity have been fully revealed.
根据公开披露的大量信息，美方有关机构一直对包括其盟国在内的多国政府部门、机构、企业、大学、个人进行网络侵入和监听、监控。
According to plenty of information that has been made public, US agencies have been engaging in cyber intrusion, surveillance and monitoring activities on foreign governments, institutions, enterprises, universities and individuals, including on its allies.
中国也是美方网络窃密和监听、监控的严重受害者。
China is also a victim of this.
中方多次就此向美方提出严正交涉，要求美方作出解释，立即停止此类活动。
We have lodged stern representations to the US and asked it to make explanations and immediately stop such activities.
问：近日，一些外国公司和媒体认为新冠肺炎疫情对中国经济的影响将产生多米诺骨牌效应，冲击全球供应链，拉低今年世界经济增速。
Some foreign financial institutions and media believe that the NCP epidemic will trigger a domino effect on China's economy, have a major impact on global supply chain and lead to a slowdown in world economic growth.
你对此如何看?
What is your comment?
答：上周，在国新办举办的国务院应对新冠肺炎疫情联防联控机制新闻发布会上，国家发展改革委等部门已就疫情对中国经济的影响作了介绍。
At last week's press briefing on inter-agency NCP prevention and control held by the State Council Information Office, officials of the National Development and Reform Commission and other related departments talked about how China's economy will be affected.
概括地讲，疫情对中国经济影响的大小，取决于疫情防控的进展和成效。
To sum up, it all depends on the effects of the epidemic prevention and control measures.
我们相信，中国经济的基本面以及长期向好的趋势不会因为这场疫情而改变，我们有能力把疫情对经济的影响降至最低。
We believe our economic fundamentals that support China's long-term growth will remain unchanged, and we are capable of minimizing the epidemic's impact on our economy.
事实上，近日，国际货币基金组织、世界银行等国际机构都表示，中国有足够的政策空间来应对疫情，中方防控疫情的努力有效降低了世界经济可能面临的风险。
In fact, international institutions including the IMF and the World Bank noted that China has enough policy space to deal with the epidemic and China's efforts have effectively reduced the risks the world economy may be exposed to.
今天，中国的GDP已占世界GDP的16%左右，对世界经济增长的贡献率已超过30%。
Today China's GDP accounts for around 16 percent of the global total and contributes over 30 percent to world economic growth.
如果中国经济受到冲击，那么必然会波及其他国家，世界经济也必然会受到影响。
If our economy is impacted, there will inevitably be spillover effects on other countries and even the world economy.
所以说，中国的抗疫斗争既是为自己，也是为世界。
Therefore, by fighting against the NCP, China is safeguarding both its own country and the world.
支持中国、帮助中国，也是在维护国际社会共同利益。
When you are supporting and helping China, you are in fact safeguarding the common interests of all countries.
面对公共卫生危机，以邻为壑保护不了自己，过度反应只会适得其反。
Faced with a public health crisis, one cannot protect oneself by taking a "beggar-thy-neighbor" approach or overreactions.
当务之急，是国际社会团结协作共同战胜疫情，尽快恢复国家间的正常交往与合作，只有这样才能为世界经济稳定增长提供有力支撑，释放正面预期。
The urgent task for everyone is to defeat the virus together and restore normal state-to-state exchange and cooperation as soon as possible. Only by doing so can we support steady world economic growth and anchor expectations around the world.
问：阿塞拜疆于2月9日举行了议会选举。
Azerbaijan held parliamentary elections on February 9.
中方对此有何评论？
I wonder if China has a comment?
答：日前，阿塞拜疆议会选举顺利举行，中方对此表示祝贺，并真诚祝愿阿塞拜疆人民在国家发展事业中取得更大成就。
China congratulates Azerbaijan on the smooth parliamentary elections it just held. We wish its people greater success in their national development endeavors.
作为好朋友、好伙伴，中方高度重视发展中阿关系，愿同阿方共同努力，加大相互支持，高质量共建“一带一路”，推动两国关系不断迈上新台阶。
As Azerbaijan's good friend and good partner, China attaches high importance to this bilateral relationship. We stand ready to work together to enhance mutual support, pursue high-quality BRI cooperation and bring bilateral relations to a new height.
问：本周一，美国以对信用报告机构发动网络入侵为由，起诉了4名中国军方人士。
The U.S. on Monday indicted four members of the Chinese military for breaking into a credit-reporting agency.
中方有何评论？
Do you have any comment?
答：请查阅我刚才对路透社提问的回答。
Please refer to my earlier reply to the Reuters.
问：正在对印度访问的斯里兰卡总理马欣达9日在接受专访时，就中国通过“一带一路”使一些国家陷入“债务陷阱”的问题表示，“一带一路”使斯里兰卡大为受益。
Sri Lankan Prime Minister Mahinda Rajapaksa is visiting India. In an interview on February 9, when asked about the "debt traps" China's Belt and Road Initiative has laid out for other countries, he said that Sri Lanka has received a lot of benefits from being part of the BRI.
对华债务只占斯外债总额12%，斯从未债务违约，我们利用中国贷款开展基础设施建设。
Sri Lanka's external debt towards China is only 12% of its overall external debt, and they have not defaulted. They used the money to build infrastructure.
答：中方对马欣达总理有关表态表示赞赏。
We commend these comments made by Prime Minister Mahinda Rajapaksa.
中斯是世代友好、真诚互助的战略合作伙伴。
China and Sri Lanka share a strategic cooperative partnership based on sincere mutual assistance and ever-lasting friendship.
长期以来，中方基于斯发展需要，向斯方提供了一些贷款，支持斯基础设施等重大国计民生项目建设。
Based on Sri Lanka's development needs, China offered loans to support its infrastructure building and other major domestic projects concerning people's livelihood.
中方相关项目和贷款拉动了斯经济增长，提供大量就业，也为斯可持续发展提供了动力，得到了斯历届政府和广大民众的积极评价。
These projects and loans have boosted Sri Lanka's economic growth, created a large amount of local jobs and contributed to the country's sustainable development. Those outcomes have been commended by the government and people of Sri Lanka.
中方愿继续同斯方在共建“一带一路”框架下加强合作，造福两国人民。
China stands ready to strengthen BRI cooperation with Sri Lanka to deliver more benefits to the two peoples.
问：美国国务卿蓬佩奥日前在美国全国州长协会会议上发表演讲，称美中竞争正在联邦到地方层面全面展开，中方利用美政治体系自由开放的特点对美地方各州施加影响、进行渗透，要求美地方政府重视对华竞争并慎重开展对华合作。
In a speech to the National Governors Association, US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said competition with China is happening at the federal level, the state level and the local level, and China is exploiting the free and open political systems of the US to exert influence and seek infiltration at all these levels. He urged governors of US states and territories to take such competition seriously and adopt a cautious mindset when engaging in cooperation with China.
请问中方对此有何评论？
What is your comment?
答：蓬佩奥的演讲罔顾中美关系的历史和现实，通篇充斥冷战思维和政治偏见，中方对此坚决反对。
Mr. Pompeo's remarks reveal a shocking disregard for the actual course of China-US relations. We are firmly opposed to this speech fraught with Cold-War mentality and political prejudice.
中国走的是中国特色社会主义道路，中国共产党的领导是中国特色社会主义最本质的特征，这是历史和人民的选择。
China follows the path of socialism with Chinese characteristics with the leadership of the CPC as its defining feature. This path is a historical choice made by the Chinese people.
中国人民将坚定不移沿着这条道路走下去，并将不断取得更大辉煌。任何人都不要幻想阻挡中国人民前进的步伐。
We will stay true to it and forge ahead for greater progress. Anyone seeking to stand in our way forward should think twice.
中美重新打开交往大门之始，双方就清楚地认识到两国政治制度不同。
Since the very beginning when the PRC and the US started engaging with each other, the difference in our political systems has been clearly recognized by both.
这也是为什么中美三个联合公报强调双方要始终相互尊重、互不干涉内政、平等相待。
That is also why the three China-US joint communiques emphasized mutual respect, non-interference in each other's internal affairs and equality.
看来蓬佩奥并不了解中美三个联合公报内容或者是故意不想去了解。
It seems Mr. Pompeo is not familiar with these documents, or perhaps he just doesn't want to bother.
中美建交40多年来，两国关系尽管经历波折，但总体向前发展，给两国人民带来了实实在在的利益，有力促进了亚太和世界的和平、稳定与繁荣，这已是不争的事实，也不是任何人可以用几句话就能抹杀的。
Over the four decades of diplomatic relations, China and the US have generally moved forward our bilateral ties despite some trials and turbulence, which has brought tangible benefits to the two peoples and made important contributions to peace, stability and prosperity in the Asia Pacific and the world beyond. This is a fact that is not to be disputed, nor erased by somebody simply saying a few words.
中美地方合作、人文交流是两国关系的重要组成部分。
Sub-national cooperation and people-to-people exchanges constitute an important part of China-US relations.
加强两国地方和人文交往是两国人民的共同愿望，符合双方共同利益。
It meets the shared wish and serves the common interests of the two sides to strengthen sub-national and people-to-people interactions.
作为美国国务卿不但对此不予推进，反而蓄意干扰阻挠，逆两国人民意愿而行，令人费解。
Thus, it is perplexing that the US Secretary of State should obstruct such exchanges on purpose and go against the wish of the people, instead of playing a facilitating role.
中国驻美使领馆和各类人民团体一向按照国际法和中美双边协议行事，与美各级政府交往都是为了促进两国相互了解、交流与合作，合理合法、光明磊落、无可非议。
China's diplomatic missions and civil groups in the US have been following international law and bilateral agreements. Their interactions with the US governments at all levels are to promote mutual understanding, exchanges and cooperation, thus legitimate, lawful, open and aboveboard, and beyond reproach.
我们奉劝蓬佩奥摒弃冷战思维和意识形态偏见，尊重中美关系历史和基本事实，停止诬蔑中国政治制度，停止做干扰破坏两国正常交往合作的事情。
Mr. Pompeo should step out of his Cold War mindset and ideological prejudices, show his respect to the history and basic facts concerning China-US relations, stop smearing China's political system, and stop undermining bilateral exchanges and cooperation.
问：你昨天提到，截至2月10日8时，共有27名在华外国人确诊患新型冠状病毒肺炎。
You mentioned yesterday that as of 08:00 on February 10, 27 foreigners in China had been diagnosed with the novel coronavirus pneumonia.
截至今天，人数是否有变化？能否介绍他们的国籍或具体情况？
Any updates as of today? Could you tell us their nationality or other details?
答：昨天我已经介绍了有关情况。
I briefed you yesterday on the related situation.
据向有关部门了解，今天无新增在华外国人确诊患新型冠状病毒肺炎病例，治愈出院人数从3人增至7人。
After checking with the relevant department, there have been no newly confirmed cases of foreigners in China today and the number of cured and discharged cases of foreign nationals has risen from 3 to 7.
问：据报道，俄罗斯驻华大使杰尼索夫10日表示，俄中关系是当代国际关系的引领者，堪称稳定牢固的典范。
Russian Ambassador to China Andrey Denisov said on February 10 that the Russia-China relationship is leading the modern international relations and a model of stability and strength.
今年中俄间一系列元首互访将按计划进行,包括习近平主席将于5月应邀出席卫国战争胜利日75周年庆典,7月访问圣彼得堡，普京总统也将于下半年访华。
The interactions between the two heads of state will go in accordance with the schedule. President Xi Jinping will participate in events commemorating the 75th anniversary of the Soviet Union's victory in the Great Patriotic War in May and visit St. Petersburg in July, while President Putin is expected to visit China in the second half of the year.
中方对此有何评论?
What's your comment?
答：中方完全同意杰尼索夫大使对中俄关系的积极评价。
China fully agrees with Ambassador Denisov's positive comments on China-Russia relations.
在习近平主席和普京总统的战略引领下，中俄全面战略协作伙伴关系进入新时代。
Under the strategic guidance of President Xi Jinping and President Putin, the China-Russia comprehensive strategic partnership of coordination has entered a new era.
不论国际形势如何变幻，中俄始终坚持结伴而不结盟、对话而不对抗，始终本着平等、开放、互利共赢的原则开展各领域务实合作。
No matter how the international landscape may change, China and Russia have always adhered to the principle of partnership instead of alliance and dialogue instead of confrontation, and conducted practical cooperation in various fields on the basis of equality, openness and mutual benefit.
面对复杂多变的外部环境，中俄关系展现出强大的稳定性和内生动力，不受干扰和影响。
Faced with a complex and volatile external environment, China-Russia relations have shown strong stability and endogenous dynamic, which is insusceptible to external disturbance or influence.
今年是二战胜利暨联合国成立75周年，也是中俄科技创新年的开局之年，中俄关系发展面临新机遇。
This year marks the 75th anniversary of the victory of the Second World War and the founding of the United Nation. It is also the start of the "Year of Scientific and Technological Innovation" in China and Russia.
双方将保持两国高层密切交往的良好势头，全面落实好两国元首达成的各项共识，推动各领域合作收获更多成果，共同为维护世界和平与安宁作出更大贡献。
Our bilateral relations are presented with new opportunities. The two sides will maintain the good momentum of close high-level exchanges, fully implement the consensus reached by the two heads of state, strive for more outcomes of cooperation in various fields and jointly contribute more to world peace and tranquility.
问：巴基斯坦参议院10日通过决议，表示巴方坚定支持中方抗击新冠肺炎疫情，赞赏中国政府抗疫措施和保护巴基斯坦在华留学生的努力，并表示将与中方一道努力抗击疫情。
Senate of Pakistan passed a resolution on February 10 expressing full solidarity and support to China in combating the NCP. It appreciated the Chinese government's measures to combat the virus and protect Pakistani students in China. It also said that Pakistan will work together with China to fight the epidemic.
答：中方高度赞赏巴方通过有关决议。
China highly appreciate the resolution passed by the Pakistani side.
中巴是全天候战略合作伙伴和“铁杆朋友”，有互帮互助的优良传统。
China and Pakistan are iron-clad friends and all-weather strategic cooperative partners with a tradition of mutual assistance.
巴方通过有关决议再次充分体现中巴两国人民患难与共的真情，也再次证明中巴是同舟共济、守望相助的命运共同体。
This resolution stands as further testament to the unwavering friendship between our two countries and peoples. It shows once again that we, as a community with a shared future, can always rely on each other in difficult times.
我们愿同包括巴方在内的国际社会加强合作，共同应对疫情，促进全球公共卫生事业。
China stands ready to strengthen cooperation with Pakistan and other members of the international community to combat the epidemic and contribute to global public health.
我们也愿本着高度负责的态度，同巴方加强沟通协作，维护好巴基斯坦在华侨民的健康和安全。
With a highly responsible attitude, we will also enhance communication and coordination with Pakistan and do our best to ensure the health and safety of Pakistani nationals in China.
问：你能否介绍在华外国人感染的最新情况？中国国家卫健委每天发布的确诊病例、死亡病例和出院人数等数字是否包括在华外国人？
Could you update us on the latest situation of infection among foreigners in China? And I would like to confirm whether the number of confirmed cases, deaths and discharged cases released by the National Health Commission every day includes those of foreigners in China?
答：关于第一个问题，昨天我已经介绍了有关情况。
On your first question, I briefed you on the situation yesterday.
据向有关部门了解，今天无新增在华外国人确诊患新型冠状病毒肺炎病例，治愈出院人数从3人增至7人。
After checking with the relevant department, there have been no newly confirmed cases of foreigners in China today and the number of cured and discharged cases has risen from 3 to 7.
关于第二个问题，据我了解，国家卫健委发布的数据包括在华外国公民病例。
On your second question, my information is that cases of foreign nationals are included in the NHC figures.
问：巴基斯坦和尼泊尔是为数不多的几个仍有留学生滞留在武汉的国家。
Pakistanis and Nepalis are among the few international students remaining in Wuhan.
柬埔寨和一些非洲国家也有部分留学生滞留武汉。
Cambodia and some African countries have also left some of their students in Wuhan.
中方是否做了相关国家工作，说服他们不撤侨、不断航。
Is China taking active measures to convince these countries to keep their nationals in Wuhan and keeping flights between these countries open?
哪些国家承诺不从武汉撤侨？
Also is there a list of countries which have said they do not plan to evacuate citizens from Wuhan?
答：中方高度重视保护在湖北武汉的各国公民的生命安全和身体健康，积极采取有效措施，及时解决他们的合理关切和要求。
China attaches great importance to the health and safety of all foreign nationals in Wuhan, Hubei province. We have taken effective measures to timely respond to their concerns and requests.
世界卫生组织谭德塞总干事多次强调，不建议仓促撤侨，最好的办法是留在原地并做好自我防护。
WHO DG Tedros also stressed many times that flying out in a rush is not recommended, the best way being stay put and enhancing self-protection.
当然，对于希接回本国在武汉公民的国家，中方会根据国际惯例，依照中方有关防疫规定，做出相应安排并为此提供必要协助和便利。
For those countries that wish to take home their nationals, China will make relevant arrangements and offer necessary assistance consistent with international practices and our domestic epidemic control measures.
世卫组织还多次强调，不赞成对中国实施旅行和贸易等限制。
WHO also stressed many times that it does not recommend imposing travel and trade restrictions on China.
针对一些国家采取断航等过度反应措施，国际民航组织也发出公告，强烈敦促各国遵循世卫组织建议。
As some countries have taken such excessive steps as suspending flights, ICAO has also issued bulletins and encouraged all countries to follow WHO recommendations.
我们希望世卫组织和国际民航组织的专业意见能够得到尊重。
We hope the professional recommendations of WHO and ICAO will be respected.
问：据报道，2月11日至12日，世界卫生组织将在日内瓦举行全球研究及创新论坛，届时台湾的专家以“在线”方式参加。
According to reports, the World Health Organization will host a global research and innovation forum in Geneva from February 11 to 12. Experts from the Taiwan region will attend the meeting online.
据台媒称，台方系以“台北”名义参加。
Taiwanese media say they're participating under the name of Taipei.
答：我们高度重视台湾同胞的健康福祉。
We highly value the health and wellbeing of our Taiwan compatriots.
此次新冠肺炎疫情发生后，国家卫健委及时主动向台湾地区通报疫情防控最新情况以及在大陆确诊的台胞信息。
After the epidemic broke out, the National Health Commission has been timely and actively updating the Taiwan region on our control measures and the information of people from the Taiwan region who have been confirmed NCP cases in the mainland.
台湾参与世卫组织技术性活动，必须在一个中国原则下经过协商作出安排并经中方同意。
The Taiwan region's participation in WHO technical activities must be arranged after being agreed by the Chinese side through consultations under the one-China principle.
根据中方同世卫组织达成的安排，中方已复告世卫组织，同意台湾地区医疗卫生专家以个人名义参加此次论坛。
According to the arrangement reached by China and the WHO, China has replied to the WHO that we agree to the participation of the Taiwan region's medical experts in this forum.
民进党当局借这个问题做政治文章，搞政治操弄，令人不齿。
It is despicable for the Democratic Progressive Party authority to hype up this issue and conduct political manipulation over it.
2020年2月10日外交部发言人耿爽主持网上例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Daily Briefing Online on February 10, 2020
首先向大家通报一组数字：根据中国国家卫生健康委今天上午发布的统计数字，2月9日0-24时，中国境内新增治愈出院病例632例。
First, I'd like to share some figures with you. According to the latest data this morning from the National Health Commission, between 00:00 and 24:00, February 9, altogether 632 cured and discharged cases were newly reported in China's mainland.
截至2月9日24时，中国境内累计治愈出院病例超过3000例，达3281例。
As of 24:00 February 9, a total of 3,281 people have been cured and discharged from hospital in China's mainland.
此外，全国除湖北外其他省份每日报告的确诊病例数从2月3日890例下降到2月8日509例，降幅达42.8%。
The daily increase of confirmed cases in China (excluding Hubei) fell 42.8% from 890 (February 3) to 509 (February 8).
问：最近一段时间，多国高官同王毅国务委员通话，对中方抗击新冠肺炎疫情采取的举措给予支持。
In the past few days, senior officials of many countries all expressed support and appreciation for China’s epidemic control measures in their phone calls with State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi.
一些国家并表示如果疫情发生在中国以外的其他地方，肯定难以得到如此有效的防控。
Some said the epidemic would not have been contained so effectively if it had struck elsewhere.
但我们注意到，也有一些声音怀疑中方能否控制疫情并防止向其他国家蔓延。
At the same time, we also see concerns over China’s capacity to control the epidemic and prevent cross-border spread.
中方对此有何评论？
Do you have a comment?
答：新冠肺炎疫情是人类面临的共同挑战，需要国际社会携手应对。
The novel coronavirus Pneumonia (NCP) is a challenge for all human beings, which needs to be tackled jointly by the international community.
中方为应对疫情采取的有力举措不仅在对本国人民负责，也在对全世界负责。
By taking strong measures, China is not just acting for the sake of its own people, but for people across the world.
在这场没有硝烟的战“疫”中，我们用中国速度为世界防疫争取宝贵时间，用中国力量筑牢控制疫情蔓延的防线，用中国实践为世界防疫树立新的标杆。
In this battle against the invisible enemy, we are working around the clock to allow time for global preparedness, fighting on the front lines to contain the virus and setting a new standard for epidemic response.
世卫组织总干事谭德塞说，正是由于中方采取强有力防控措施以及中国人民作出的巨大牺牲，才有效阻遏了疫情向世界上其他国家的蔓延。
As WHO Director-General Dr. Tedros put it, it was because of China’s strong measures and Chinese people’s sacrifice that cross-border spread of the epidemic has been effectively contained.
联合国秘书长古特雷斯也表示，中国为控制新冠病毒并避免其蔓延已做出巨大和非凡的努力。
UN Secretary-General António Guterres also commended China for its massive and remarkable efforts to contain the virus propagation.
国际社会需保持强有力的合作与团结，避免在应对疫情时出现污名化的情况。
We need to have very strong international cooperation and solidarity and avoid the stigmatization that can sometimes accompany a situation like this. As we speak, China’s all-out efforts are continuing with increasing effects.
目前中方各项工作正有序推进，逐步取得积极成效，治愈人数已明显超过病亡人数，疑似病例增速趋缓。
Cured cases have far outstripped fatal ones and the increase in suspected cases has moderated.
有着举国体制的制度优势，有着全国人民的坚定决心，有着应对“非典”的实践经验，有着国际社会的理解支持，中方完全有信心、有能力、有把握打赢这场疫情防控阻击战，同国际社会一道维护地区和全球公共卫生安全。
With the strength of our system which pools national resources, the firm conviction of the entire nation, the past experience in dealing with SARS, and the understanding and support from the international community, China has full confidence and capability to win the fight against the epidemic and jointly uphold regional and global public health security with the international community.
问：在华外国人感染新冠肺炎的最新数字是多少？你能否提供患新冠肺炎死亡的美国公民的更多细节？
What's the latest on how many foreigners in China are infected? Do you have any more details on the US citizen who died?
有多少希望回国的外国人仍滞留在武汉？
And how many foreigners who want to be evacuated are still stranded in Wuhan?
答：据向有关部门了解，截至2月10日8时，共有27名在华外国人确诊患新型冠状病毒肺炎，其中3人已治愈出院，2人死亡，22人正接受隔离治疗。
We have checked with the relevant department. As of 08:00, February 10, 27 foreign citizens in China have been diagnosed with the NCP. Among them, there are three recovered and discharged cases, two deaths and 22 cases under treatment in isolation.
关于第二个问题，据了解，2月6日19时，一名美籍华人在中国湖北省武汉市病逝。
Regarding your second question, as we know, a Chinese American passed away in Wuhan, Hubei at 19:00 on February 6.
该美籍华人在华治疗期间，中方一直同其在华亲属保持联系，并予以积极救治。
While medical workers were doing the best to treat the patient in hospital, the Chinese side has also been in contact with the family in China.
我们谨对逝者表示哀悼。
We offer the deepest condolences over the American national’s passing.
中方已通过外交渠道将有关情况通报美方，愿继续协助美方及家属处理好后续事宜。
We have notified the US through diplomatic channels and will offer necessary assistance to the US side and the bereaved family for follow-up matters.
关于第三个问题，中方高度重视保护在湖北武汉的各国公民的生命安全和身体健康，积极采取有效措施，及时解决他们的合理关切和要求。
As to your third question, China attaches great importance to the health and safety of all foreign nationals in Wuhan, Hubei province. We have taken effective measures to timely respond to their reasonable concerns and requests.
世界卫生组织谭德塞总干事也多次强调，不建议仓促撤侨，最好的办法是留在原地并做好自我防护。
WHO DG Tedros also stressed many times that flying out in a rush is not recommended, the best way being stay put and enhancing self-protection.
我们希望WHO的专业意见能够得到尊重。
We hope that WHO’s professional recommendations will be respected.
当然，对于希接回本国在武汉公民的国家，中方会根据国际惯例，依照中方有关防疫规定，做出相应安排并为此提供必要协助和便利。
Indeed, for those countries that wish to take home their nationals, China will make relevant arrangements and offer necessary assistance consistent with international practices and our domestic epidemic control measures.
问：世界卫生组织国际专家团队正赶来北京，帮助应对新冠病毒肺炎。
An international team of experts led by the WHO is coming to Beijing to help tackle the outbreak.
专家组有没有美国专家？中方是否掌握相关信息？
Do you have any information on if there’s any American experts among them?
答：中方始终本着公开、透明、负责任态度，同世卫组织和国际社会保持沟通、加强合作，共同维护全球和地区公共卫生安全。
Acting in an open, transparent and responsible way, China has been sharing information and strengthening cooperation with WHO and the international community to jointly safeguard global and regional public health security.
至于联合专家考察组的情况，据我了解，世卫组织先遣组今天将抵京，与中方就考察组的具体安排进行讨论。
With regard to the WHO expert group, as far as I know, the advance team will arrive in Beijing today to discuss specific arrangements for the China-WHO joint mission.
我愿重申，我们欢迎包括美方在内的外国专家参加联合专家考察组。
I’d like to reiterate that we welcome all foreign experts including those from the US to join.
具体情况你可以向国家卫健委询问。
I would refer you to the NHC for more details.
问：据报道，以色列总理内塔尼亚胡2月8日表示，以色列正在绘制包括犹太人定居点和约旦河谷在内的区域地图，因为根据美方新中东和平计划，这些地区都将属于以色列。
Media reports quote Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu as saying on February 8 that Israel is mapping the area including all Israeli settlements and the Jordan Valley which, according to the US Middle East peace plan, will become part of the state of Israel.
同日，巴勒斯坦总统发言人表示，巴勒斯坦唯一能够接受的地图是以1967年边界为基础，以耶路撒冷为首都的巴勒斯坦国地图。
On the same day, a spokesman for Palestinian President said that “the only map that can be accepted as the map of Palestine is the map of the Palestinian state on the 1967 borders with Jerusalem as its capital”.
中方有何评论？
What’s China’s comment?
答：中方反对任何可能导致巴以矛盾激化的单边行动，呼吁以方谨慎行事，避免加剧地区局势紧张动荡。
China opposes any unilateral actions that might escalate tensions between Palestine and Israel. We call on Israel to act prudently to prevent more tensions in the region.
中方一贯认为，联合国有关决议和“两国方案”、“土地换和平”原则等国际共识构成了解决巴勒斯坦问题的基础，应当得到遵守。
It is China’s consistent position that any solution to this issue should be based on international consensus including relevant UN resolutions, the "two-state solution" and the principle of "land for peace”.
任何有关巴勒斯坦问题的解决方案，应该倾听主要当事方特别是巴勒斯坦方面的看法和主张，应该通过平等对话和谈判达成协议，应该有利于推动巴勒斯坦问题早日实现全面、公正、持久解决。
Any agreement should be reached through equal-footed dialogue and negotiation after taking into consideration the view and propositions of main parties concerned, especially Palestine, and the agreement should be conducive to reaching a comprehensive, just and lasting solution of the Palestinian issue at an early date.
问：中方日前称，意大利驻华大使表示，意将尽快恢复部分民航。
The Chinese side recently quoted the Italian ambassador to China as saying that Italy is ready to resume some civil flights as soon as possible.
但意大利政府表示没有改变现状的计划。
Meanwhile the Italian government denied any plans to change the current status.
能否介绍最新情况？
Can you please provide further update on the situation?
答：新冠肺炎疫情发生以来，中方采取了最彻底、最严格的防控措施，其中很多都超出了世界卫生组织的建议和《国际卫生条例》的要求。
After the epidemic broke out, China has taken the most comprehensive and rigorous prevention and control measures, many of which far exceed WHO recommendations and what the International Health Regulations requires.
世界卫生组织多次强调不建议对中国实施旅行和贸易等限制。
The WHO has repeatedly said that it does not recommend putting travel and trade restrictions on China.
希望意方科学评估、理性对待，尊重世界卫生组织权威专业建议，不要作出过度反应。
We hope that Italy can assess the epidemic situation in an objective, rational and science-based manner, respect the WHO’s authoritative and professional recommendations, and refrain from taking excessive measures.
我们也看到，近日意大利政要和各界友人以多种方式表达对中方抗击疫情的支持。
We have also seen that these days, many political figures and friends from all walks of life in Italy have expressed their support to China’s efforts against the epidemic.
中方航班已获得意方许可飞意，接回了滞留在意的中国公民。
The Chinese flights have received permission from the Italian side and brought home the stranded Chinese citizens from Italy.
中方将继续以公开、透明的方式同世界卫生组织和包括意大利在内的各国加强合作，共同有效应对疫情，维护全球公共卫生安全。
China will continue to enhance its cooperation with the WHO and other countries including Italy in an open and transparent manner to jointly tackle the epidemic and safeguard regional and global health security.
问：据报道，美财政部7日宣布对委内瑞拉联合航空公司实施制裁。
On February 7, the U.S. Treasury Department announced sanctions on Venezuelan state-run airline Conviasa.
美方称，美政府不会允许马杜罗及其代理继续窃取委人民财富，滥用国有资产继续推进腐败和破坏稳定的活动。
The US said in a statement that it "will not allow Maduro and his proxies to continue stealing from the Venezuelan people and abusing state-owned assets to advance their own corrupt and destabilizing activities."
答：中方在委内瑞拉问题上的立场是一贯的、明确的，始终坚持《联合国宪章》和国际关系基本准则，反对外部干涉委内瑞拉内政，反对单边制裁。
China’s position on the Venezuela issue is clear and consistent. We as always remain committed to the UN Charter and the basic norms governing international relations and oppose unilateral sanctions and external interference in Venezuela’s internal affairs.
去年以来，有关国家不断升级对委内瑞拉制裁，严重影响委内瑞拉经济民生和对外交往，不断增加委内瑞拉局势失控风险。
Since last year, certain country has escalated sanctions on Venezuela several times, which has seriously affected Venezuela’s economy, the Venezuelan people’s livelihood and its foreign relations with other countries, leading to a higher risk of the situation losing control.
中方敦促有关国家正视委内瑞拉人道现实，停止对委内瑞拉单边制裁和“长臂管辖”，为委内瑞拉正常国际交往和稳定发展创造必要条件。
We urge the certain country to face squarely the humanitarian realities in Venezuela, stop imposing unilateral sanctions or long-arm jurisdictions, and work to create necessary conditions for Venezuela to achieve stable growth and have normal foreign relations with other countries.
问：能否介绍WHO联合专家组有关情况？他们将访问中国哪些地方？停留多长时间？能否介绍专家组具体人员构成？
Can you share any details about the WHO-led team of international experts visiting China? Where will they visit and how long will they stay? Which experts are part of the group?
答：中方始终本着公开、透明、负责任态度，同世卫组织和国际社会保持沟通、加强合作，共同维护全球和地区公共卫生安全。
Acting in an open, transparent and responsible way, China has been sharing information and strengthening cooperation with the WHO and the international community to jointly safeguard global and regional public health security.
至于联合专家考察组的情况，据我了解，世卫组织先遣组今天将抵京，与中方就考察组的具体安排进行讨论。
With regard to the WHO expert group, as far as I know, the WHO advance team will arrive in Beijing today to discuss specific arrangements for the China-WHO joint mission.
我们欢迎外国专家参加联合专家考察组。
We welcome all foreign experts to join.
问：据报道，俄罗斯政府向中方提供了23吨医疗救援物资，运送物资的飞机9日抵达武汉。
It is reported that the plane carrying 23 tons of medical supplies from the Russian government arrived in Wuhan on February 9.
《俄罗斯报》10日发表社论《中俄患难与共》，积极评价中方抗疫举措，并推出“中国加油！我们在一起！”的整版海报。
Russian media Rossiyskaya Gazeta today published an editorial titled China and Russia Share Weal and Woe to praise China's fight against the epidemic measures and a full-page ad saying "Stay strong, China! We stand with you!".
中方对此有何评论？
What is China's comment?
答：9日，俄罗斯政府向中方提供的医疗援助物资运抵武汉市，其中包括超过200万只口罩在内的大量医疗防护用品，双方已顺利完成交接。
On February 9, a large amount of medical supplies including over 2 million masks sent by the Russian government arrived at Wuhan. The supplies have been delivered to the Chinese side.
中方也注意到《俄罗斯报》发表《中俄患难与共》的社论。
We also noted the editorial of China and Russia sharing weal and woe published in Rossiyskaya Gazeta.
正如社论中所说，新冠肺炎疫情发生后，俄方多次给予中方坚定支持。
As it said, after the NCP outbreak, Russia has been lending its firm support to China.
普京总统致信习近平主席表示慰问，高度评价和赞赏中方采取的疫情防控举措和取得的效果。
In a letter to President Xi, President Putin expressed sympathy and highly commended China for its epidemic control measures and their effects.
除提供医疗救援物资援助外，俄政府还派遣防疫专家代表团来华，与中方专家共同探讨合作应对疫情。
Besides medical supplies, the Russian government also sent experts to work with their Chinese counterparts on epidemic response.
“中国加油！我们在一起”充分反映了俄罗斯政府和人民支援中国抗疫的心声，展现了中俄新时代全面战略协作伙伴关系的高水平和两国患难与共、守望相助的深厚情谊。
We have received the message "Stay strong, China! We stand with you!" from the Russian government and people. It also demonstrates the high level of our comprehensive strategic partnership of coordination in a new era and the deep bond of mutual assistance between our two countries.
中方对此表示衷心感谢，并愿继续与俄方就防控疫情加强协调与合作，共同为维护地区和国际公共卫生安全作出贡献。
China is truly grateful. We will continue to work with Russia for better coordination and cooperation in epidemic control and contribution to regional and global public health security.
问：截至目前，中方确诊病例中有几名外国人？能否介绍具体情况？
Up to now, how many foreigners are among the confirmed cases in China? Can you give us more details?
答：据向有关部门了解，截至2月10日8时，共有27名在华外国人确诊患新型冠状病毒肺炎，其中3人已治愈出院，2人死亡，22人正接受隔离治疗。
We have checked with the competent authority. As of 08:00, February 10, altogether 27 foreign citizens in China have been diagnosed with the NCP. Among them, there are three recovered and discharged cases, two deaths and 22 cases under treatment in isolation.
问：中国的中小学及高校最晚何时复课？
Is there any nationwide deadline for opening schools and universities?
答：请向有关部门询问。
I’d refer you to the competent authorities.
问：2月7日，第36届非盟部长级会议专门发布公报，一致支持中国政府和人民抗击新冠肺炎疫情的努力，相信中国政府应对疫情挑战的能力。
The 36th Ordinary Session of the AU Executive Council issued a communique on February 7, in which the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of AU Member States expressed their solidarity with the Chinese government and people in the efforts to counter spread of the novel coronavirus, and their confidence in China’s ability to deal with the challenges.
答：如你所说，日前召开的非盟第36届部长级会议发表特别公报，表示本着非盟成员国与中国间强有力的战略伙伴关系，并鉴于双方兄弟般的历史纽带与合作，非盟成员国外长集体宣布，同中国政府和人民站在一起，支持中方抗击新型冠状病毒肺炎疫情的努力，对中方应对疫情的能力充满信心，呼吁世界各国同中方同舟共济，加强合作，共同应对疫情带来的影响。
As you said, the 36th Ordinary Session of the AU Executive Council issued a communique in which the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of AU Member States, in the spirit of the strong strategic partnership existing between AU Member States and China and cognizant of the fraternal historical ties and cooperation between the two sides, expressed their solidarity with the Chinese government and people in the efforts to counter spread of the novel coronavirus, their confidence in China’s ability to deal with the challenges, and their call for coordination with the various national and international bodies to strengthen cooperation and to cope with its ramifications.
这是在抗击疫情的关键时刻，非洲朋友给予中方的有力支持，展现了中非患难与共的兄弟情谊。
At this crucial juncture, our African friends have given us strong support and showcased our brotherhood through thick and thin.
在武汉的埃塞俄比亚学生联合会发表支持中国、支持武汉的公开倡议书，一些在华非洲留学生主动“请战”前往救治一线或赴火车站等地担任志愿者。
The Ethiopian Students Union in Wuhan wrote an open letter in support of Wuhan and China. Some African students in China volunteered to go to the front-line of this battle against the epidemic or worked at the train stations as volunteers.
我们相信经过这次疫情的洗礼，中非人民的友好情谊将更加深厚，中非命运共同体将更加牢固。
We believe that through the trial of this epidemic, China-Africa friendship will grow even deeper and the China-Africa community with a shared future will emerge stronger.
问：本月14－16日将举行慕尼黑安全会议。
The Munich Security Conference will be held from 14th to 16th this month.
去年，王毅国务委员代表中方参会，今年谁将代表中方参会？今年会议的焦点是美国退出《中导条约》之后的全球军控方向，中方将提出怎样的建议或主张？
As I recall, State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi attended the meeting last year and can you tell us who will represent China this year? This year's meeting will focus on the direction of global arms control after the US withdrawal from the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty. What proposals or propositions will China put forward?
答：如有相关消息，我们会及时发布。
We will update you if there’s any information on that.
至于你关心的军控问题，我可以向你介绍中方原则立场。
Regarding to the issue of arms control, I’ll briefly talk about China’s principled position on arms control.
中方一贯致力于维护全球和平、安全与稳定，致力于维护国际军控与防扩散体系，这一点国际社会有目共睹。
China is committed to safeguarding global peace, security and stability, and to upholding the international arms control and non-proliferation regime. Our efforts are witnessed by the international community.
中方愿与各方一道，继续在裁军谈判会议、五核国机制等框架内加强沟通与协作，就事关全球战略稳定的广泛议题进行讨论，切实维护多边主义和多边裁军机制，维护基于国际法的国际秩序，维护现有军控与防扩散法律体系的权威性和有效性，为国际和平安全作出积极贡献。
China stands ready to work with all parties to strengthen communication and coordination within such frameworks as the Conference on Disarmament and the mechanism of five nuclear-weapon states, discuss a wide range of issues concerning global strategic stability, earnestly safeguard multilateralism and multilateral disarmament mechanisms, uphold the international order based on international law, defend the authority and efficacy of existing arms control and non-proliferation legal systems, and make contributions to international peace and security.
问：你刚才表示共有27名在华外国人确诊患新型冠状病毒肺炎，其中2人死亡。
You just said that a total of 27 foreigners in China have been confirmed of novel coronavirus pneumonia, of which two have died.
一名应该是你刚才介绍的美国人，另一名是哪国人？据了解，8日，一名日本男性在武汉去世，你能否介绍情况？
One of them I suppose is the American citizen you just mentioned, and which country is the other one from? As I understand, a Japanese man died in Wuhan on February 8. Do you have any information?
答：死亡的2人，一名为美国公民，另一名为日本公民。
Of the two fatal cases, one of them was an American citizen and the other was Japanese.
美国公民的情况我刚才已经做了回应。
I responded to a question related to the US citizen earlier.
至于日本公民的情况，据了解，2月8日凌晨，一名日本公民在中国湖北省武汉市病逝。
As I know, the Japanese national passed away in Wuhan, Hubei on the early morning of February 8.
该日本公民在华治疗期间，中方一直同其家属保持联系，并予以积极救治。
While medical workers were doing the best to treat the patient in hospital, the Chinese side has also been in contact with the family in China.
我们谨对逝者表示哀悼。
We offer the deepest condolences over the Japanese national’s passing.
中方已通过外交渠道将有关情况通报日方，愿继续协助日方及家属处理好后续事宜。
We have notified Japan through diplomatic channels and will offer necessary assistance to the Japanese side and the bereaved family.
问：肺炎疫情爆发后，中韩双方是否就调整习近平主席访韩事宜进行过沟通？年初，韩国政府宣布习主席将于今年上半年访韩，双方是否就访问具体日期达成一致？
Have Chinese and South Korean governments discussed any adjustments or changes regarding Chinese President Xi Jinping's planned visit to Seoul since the outbreak of the epidemic? Earlier this year, the South Korean government has announced President Xi would visit Seoul in the first half of the year. Have the two governments agreed on the specific date of the visit?
答：中国政府正在全力抗击新冠肺炎疫情，并以公开透明、负责任的态度及时向国际社会发布信息、共享数据，采取了最全面、最严格的防控举措，国际社会对此予以充分肯定和高度评价。
The Chinese government is making all-out efforts to fight against NCP. We have been releasing and sharing statistics and information with the international community in an open, transparent and responsible way and taken the utmost comprehensive and strict prevention and control measures. All these have been highly recognized and lauded by the international community.
日前，韩国总统文在寅积极评价中国政府为应对疫情所作努力，表示相信疫情将早日得到控制，韩方愿尽力向中方提供支援和合作。
ROK President Moon Jae-in spoke highly of China’s efforts. He said that he believed that the epidemic will soon be brought under control and said that the ROK stands ready to assist and cooperate with China.
中方对韩国政府和民间提供的援助表示感谢。
China appreciates the assistance from the ROK government and people.
我们愿同包括韩方在内的国际社会加强合作，共同应对疫情，维护全球公共卫生安全。
We will strengthen cooperation with the ROK and other members of the international community to jointly fight the epidemic and safeguard global public health security.
中韩作为近邻，一直保持密切高层互访和政治外交沟通。
China and the ROK, as close neighbors, have been keeping high-level exchanges and political and diplomatic communications.
双方将继续为下步重要外交议程作认真准备。
The two sides will continue to make meticulous preparations for the next-stage major diplomatic agenda.
问：据了解，去世的日本公民一直是疑似病例。
As I understand, the Japanese citizen who passed away was a suspected case.
该日本公民已经被确诊了吗？
Was he already confirmed of the NCP?
答：我没有进一步的消息可以提供。
I have nothing to update you at the moment.
问：还有多少外国公民滞留武汉？如无法撤离，情况会怎样？
How many foreign nationals are still in Wuhan? What will happen to those who are not able to be evacuated by their governments?
答：中方高度重视保护在湖北武汉的各国公民的生命安全和身体健康，积极采取有效措施，及时解决他们的合理关切和要求。
China highly values the health and safety of foreign nationals in Wuhan, Hubei and takes effective measures to address their concerns and needs.
问：目前，有多少企业已经复产复工？企业的复工率是多少？
Can you let us know how many enterprises resumed work today? What is the rate of resuming enterprise?
答：建议你向有关部门询问。
I’d refer you to the competent authorities.
问：你能否提供27名确诊患新型冠状病毒肺炎在华外国人的国籍？
Could you please tell us the nationalities of those 27 foreigners who have been diagnosed with the novel coronavirus pneumonia in China?
答：据向有关部门了解，截至2月10日8时，共有27名在华外国人确诊患新型冠状病毒肺炎，其中3人已治愈出院，2人死亡（一名美国公民、一名日本公民），22人正接受隔离治疗。
According to the competent authority, as of 08:00, February 10, altogether 27 foreign citizens in China have been diagnosed with the NCP. Among them, there are three recovered and discharged cases, two deaths (one American and one Japanese) and 22 cases under treatment in isolation.
这是目前我能够提供的信息。
This is all I can offer you at the moment.
问：越南昨天向中方捐赠了医疗物资，请问中方是否已经收到？
Has China received the medical supplies Vietnam sent to China yesterday? How will they be used in the future?
将如何使用？据我所知，在华确诊病例中有一名越南人，她的情况如何？
As far as we know, one of the confirmed cases in China is a Vietnamese. How is she doing?
答：据了解，越南政府向中方捐助的医用手套、医用口罩、防护服等医疗物资已于2月10日运抵武汉。
The medical gloves, masks and protective suits donated by the Vietnamese government have arrived in Wuhan on February 10.
我们对所有给予中方的真诚支持与帮助都表示衷心感谢。
Our heartfelt thanks go to all those who provided us with sincere support and help.
据了解，外国官方和国际组织对中方的物资捐赠由商务部负责接收。
As I understand, all the supplies donated by the foreign governments and international organizations are received and handled by the Ministry of Commerce.
建议你向他们去询问。
I refer you to them for more details.
至于你关心的最后一个问题，我们将帮你了解有关情况。
As for your last question, I need to check for more information and get back to you later.
问：印度总理莫迪表示，印方为中方抗击疫情提供帮助，愿合作应对疫情，并向被疫情夺去生命的逝者表示哀悼。
India Prime Minister Narendra Modi has offered India's help and other cooperation in China’s fight against the coronavirus. He has also condoled the deaths in China due to the virus.
中方对此有何评论？
Do you have any comments?
答：我们对印方支持中国抗击疫情表示感谢和赞赏。
We thank and appreciate India’s support for China’s fight against the NCP.
印方的友好姿态充分体现了印度人民对中国人民的友好感情。
India’s acts of goodwill fully demonstrate its people’s friendship with the Chinese people.
我们愿同包括印方在内的国际社会加强合作，共同应对疫情，维护地区和全球公共卫生安全。
We stand ready to work with India and other members of the international community to jointly fight the epidemic and safeguard regional and global public health security.
问：上周，发言人就《华尔街日报》发表的题为《中国是真正的亚洲病夫》的文章做出回应。
Last week the MFA spokesperson responded to a Wall Street Journal (WSJ) article titled China Is the Real Sick Man of Asia.
请问中方是否就此与《华尔街日报》进行沟通？
I wonder if you got in contact with the WSJ after that?
答：上周我的同事已就此阐明了中方的严正立场。
My colleague last week already made clear China’s solemn position.
我们已向《华尔街日报》社提出严正交涉。
We have lodged stern representations with the WSJ.
《华尔街日报》刊登的这篇文章诋毁中国政府和中国人民抗击疫情的努力，报社编辑还为该文章加上带有种族歧视色彩的耸人听闻的标题，既违背客观事实又违反职业道德，伤害了中国人民的感情，引起广大中国民众的愤慨和谴责。
The WSJ article belittled our efforts to fight against the epidemic. Its editor also headlined the article with a racially discriminatory and sensational title out of no respect for facts and professional ethics. It hurts the feelings of the Chinese people and roused public anger and condemnation.
中方要求《华尔街日报》认识到错误的严重性，公开正式道歉，并查处相关责任人。
China asks the WSJ to face squarely the severity of its mistake, make a public apology, and hold the persons involved accountable.
但迄今《华尔街日报》仍在敷衍、搪塞。
However, what the WSJ has been doing since then is nothing but paltering.
中方敦促《华尔街日报》正视中方关切，严肃回应中方的要求。
China urges WSJ to take our concerns seriously and make a response.
中方保留对该报进一步采取措施的权利。
We reserve the right to take further measures.
2020年2月7日外交部发言人华春莹主持网上例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Hua Chunying's Daily Briefing Online on February 7, 2020
首先向大家通报一组数字：根据中国国家卫生健康委今天上午发布的统计数字，2月6日0-24时，中国境内新增治愈出院病例387例，新增死亡病例73例。
Before we begin the Q&A session, I'd like to share some figures with you. According to the latest data this morning from the National Health Commission, between 00:00 and 24:00, February 6, 387 cured and discharged cases and 73 fatal cases were newly reported in China's mainland.
截至2月6日24时，中国境内累计治愈出院1540例，累计死亡病例636例。
As of 24:00 February 6, a total of 1,540 cured and discharged cases and 636 fatal cases have been reported in China's mainland.
自2月4日起，全国非湖北地区的新增确诊病例数连续三日下降。
Newly reported confirmed cases in China excluding Hubei declined for a third day starting from February 4.
问：我们知道，泰国是中国公民出境游最热门的国家之一。
As we know, Thailand is a popular destination for Chinese tourists.
不过，此次疫情发生后，泰国并没有对中国公民采取限制入境措施。
However, after the epidemic broke out, Thailand didn't impose travel restrictions on Chinese citizens.
中方对此有何评论？
What's China's comment on this?
答：中泰一家亲，患难见真情。
China and Thailand share true friendship, which is revealed during the times of hardship.
泰国作为中国的友好邻邦、全面战略合作伙伴，对中国抗击疫情给予了大力支持和真诚帮助。
As a friendly neighbor and a partner of comprehensive strategic cooperation, Thailand has given strong support and sincere assistance to China.
哇集拉隆功国王和王后、泰国政府向中方捐赠了医疗物资，巴育总理录制视频，振臂高呼“中泰团结，一起加油”。
King Maha Vajiralongkorn, Queen Suthida and the Thai government donated medical supplies to China. Prime Minister Prayut Chan-o-cha said in a video "Stay strong, China; Thailand stands with you".
泰社会各界也通过多种方式表达支持和善意，“武汉加油”、“武汉，我爱你”刷屏泰国社交媒体。
People from all walks of life in Thailand have also shown their care and support through various means. The country's social media are filled with slogans such as "Go, Wuhan" and "Wuhan, I love you".
我们相信，中泰传统友谊将在患难与共中进一步升华，两国人民将更加紧密地站在一起。
We believe our traditional friendship will grow even stronger amid the difficulties and the two peoples will stand in greater solidarity.
问：6日，台湾有关部门称大陆向世卫组织提供新型冠状病毒感染的肺炎疫情涉台信息是错误的，并表示大陆阻挠台湾地区与WHO开展合作。
The Taiwan region claims that the mainland has been sending WHO incorrect data on novel coronavirus cases in Taiwan and accuses it of thwarting the region's cooperation with the WHO.
同日，美国常驻联合国日内瓦办事处代表称，WHO需就应对疫情开展有关行动与台公共卫生部门直接接触。
US ambassador to the UN in Geneva said that the WHO needs to engage directly with Taiwan public health authorities in the fight against coronavirus.
请问发言人对此有何评论？
What's your comment?
答：这次疫情发生后，从对台湾同胞生命安全和身体健康高度重视的角度出发，国家卫健委及时向台湾地区通报疫情防控最新信息，加强海峡两岸对疫情的共同应对：主动向台湾地区分享包括诊疗方案、防控方案、常见医用防护用品使用范围指引等在内的16份技术类资料；主动向台湾地区通报新型冠状病毒基因序列和获取相关基因序列途径的信息；
Since the outbreak of the 2019-nCoV, the National Health Commission, attaching high importance to Taiwan compatriots' life and health, has kept the region informed with timely updates with a view to strengthening cross-strait response to the epidemic. It has shared with the Taiwan region 16 technical documents covering, among others, diagnostic and treatment solutions, prevention and control plans, guidelines on medical protective gear's scope of use as well as the virus' genome sequence and how this information was obtained.
主动即刻通报在大陆确诊的台湾同胞的信息，与台湾地区沟通疫情、追踪密切接触人员。
With regard to Taiwan compatriots in the mainland confirmed to be infected with the virus, we've been feeding instant information to the Taiwan region, sharing latest developments and tracing close contacts.
经向国家卫健委核实，截至2月7日上午10时，大陆向台湾地区通报疫情信息42次，台湾地区向大陆通报19次。
Upon verification with the National Health Commission, as of 10:00 February 7, China's mainland has updated the Taiwan region altogether 42 times on the epidemic and the Taiwan region has sent the mainland its 19th update.
大陆向世卫组织通报的数据信息，均以台湾地区通报的数据信息为准。
The statistics on the Taiwan region that the National Health Commission reports to the WHO is based on information provided by the Taiwan region.
如有错误，恐怕是台湾地区故意误报。
If there's any incorrect data, it would be the result of problematic information from the Taiwan region.
我要重申，WHO是由主权国家组成的联合国专门机构，台湾参与WHO等国际组织活动，必须在一个中国原则下通过两岸协商作出安排。
I would like to reiterate that the WHO is a special UN agency consisting of sovereign states. The Taiwan region's participation in the activities of international organizations such as the WHO must be arranged through cross-strait consultations under the one-China principle.
根据中方同世卫组织达成的安排，台湾地区的医疗卫生专家可以参加世卫组织相关技术会议，有需要时世卫组织专家可赴台湾地区进行考察或提供援助。
According to arrangements between China and the WHO, medical and health experts from the Taiwan region can attend WHO technical meetings and WHO experts can travel to the Taiwan region to conduct research or provide assistance when such needs arise.
台湾地区能够及时获取世卫组织发布的全球突发公共卫生事件信息，台湾地区发生的突发公共卫生事件信息也能够及时向世卫组织通报。
The Taiwan region has timely access to information on global public health emergencies released by the WHO and information can also flow readily the other way.
这些安排都确保了无论是岛内还是国际上发生突发公共卫生事件，台湾地区均可及时有效应对。
With these arrangements in place, the Taiwan region is able to cope promptly and effectively with local or global public health emergencies.
奉劝美方和台湾岛内的一些人停止以疫情为借口的政治炒作和政治化操弄。
We hope certain individuals in the Taiwan region and the US will stop all political hype-up and manipulation using the epidemic as an excuse.
问：据《金融时报》报道，一名美国官员称，美国政府以中国在密谋科学“间谍活动”为由，希望阻止中国帮助非洲国家建立非洲疾病预防控制中心，并称中国希望通过建立疾控中心窃取非洲大量基因组数据，这是对非洲的威胁。
A Financial Times report quoted a US official as saying that the US government cited concerns over China's scientific spying program as the reason to block a Chinese plan to build headquarters of the Africa Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The official claimed that China is posing a threat to Africa as it plans to steal vast amounts of genomic data from the continent.
你对此有何评论？
What's your comment?
答：这种说法同不久前美方有人污蔑“中国建设非盟会议中心是为了窃取非盟数据”的说法如出一辙，完全是无稽之谈，反映了美方个别人一贯以己之心、度人之腹。
A : This is just as ridiculous as the recent allegation by some in the US that China is building the AU conference center to steal AU data. It shows that some people in the US always make presumptions by their own pattern.
美方这位官员也许不知道，2014年西非埃博拉疫情突显非洲公共卫生体系的脆弱性，非洲迫切希望国际社会支持建设非洲疾病预防控制中心。
This official might not know in light of the fragility of Africa's public health system as revealed in the 2014 West Africa Ebola epidemic, it is Africa's urgent hope that the international community will help it build the Africa Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (Africa CDC).
2015年，中国参与非洲疾控中心等公共卫生防控体系和能力建设。
In 2015, China started helping Africa with its public health security system and capacity building.
2016年，中美签署《关于共同支持非洲疾病预防控制中心谅解备忘录》，同意按照“非方提出、非方同意和非方主导”的合作原则，共同支持非洲疾控中心建设，帮助加强非洲公共卫生安全能力。
In 2016, China and the US signed an MOU on jointly supporting the Africa CDC. The two sides agreed to, under the cooperation principle of projects proposed, agreed and led by Africa, jointly support the building of the Africa CDC, and strengthen Africa's public health capacity.
双方都派有公共卫生专家在总部担任顾问，提供技术支持。
Both have public health experts working as consultants at the headquarters for technical support.
医疗卫生是中非合作的重要领域。
The health sector is an important area in China-Africa cooperation.
中方对非医疗卫生援助是真心诚意的。中国迄已累计向非洲派出医疗队员2.1万人次，在非洲各国医治病患2.2亿人次。
China has sent medical teams of altogether 21,000 members to Africa and has treated 220 million African patients.
一些中国医疗队员甚至为援非医疗事业献出了宝贵生命，受到当地人民的尊敬。
They are deeply respected by local people as some Chinese doctors even sacrificed their lives in this cause.
在2014年3月埃博拉病毒肆虐非洲大地的时候，一些国家从西非疫区三国关闭大使馆、撤离外交官和本国公民。
After the Ebola epidemic raged through Africa in March, 2014, certain countries closed their embassies and evacuated diplomats and citizens from three West African countries hit by the epidemic.
中国政府第一时间驰援非洲，不仅送去抗疫急需物资，还派出超过1000人次的军民医疗队奔赴疫情最严重地区。
By sharp contrast, the Chinese government helped Africa at the earliest time possible. We sent not only urgently needed supplies but also medical teams of over 1,000 military and civilian doctors to areas stricken most severely by the epidemic.
中国大使馆、外交官和医疗专家都选择了坚守，与当地人民昼夜并肩作战，直至取得抗击埃博拉疫情的最终胜利。
Chinese diplomats and medical experts chose to stay there instead of withdrawing. They fought together with local people until the virus was defeated.
当前，在中国抗击疫情的关键时刻，许多非洲国家政府和人民也以多种方式向中国表达支持。
At this critical moment of fighting 2019-nCoV, African governments and people expressed support to China through various means.
患难见真情。
Hardship reveals true friendship.
中非友谊经历过风浪考验，岂是个别人挑拨离间就能动摇的？！
China-Africa friendship has withstood all tests. It cannot and will not be shaken by some people sowing discord.
问：据报道，美国联邦调查局局长雷昨天在美战略与国际研究中心会议上称，没有哪个国家比共产主义中国对美构成更大威胁，美全社会都需整体行动应对。
FBI Director Christopher Wray said at a conference at Washington's Center for Strategic and International Studies that no country poses a greater threat than Communist China and that the threat needed to be addressed through action across the whole US society.
同日，美司法部长巴尔称，中国已成为美头号地缘政治对手。
US Attorney General William Barr told the conference China has emerged as the "top geo-political adversary" of the United States.
中方对此有何回应？
Can I get a response?
答：说到威胁，我记得去年2月，皮尤研究中心一项国际民调显示，有45%的受访者认为美国是这个世界的重大威胁。
Speaking of threat, the results of a global Pew poll in February 2019 show that 45 percent of those surveyed think the US poses a serious threat to the world.
这个数字在美国一些盟友国家更高。
The figures in some US allies are even higher.
近期有一些美国媒体和美国专家学者公开表示，在地缘政治上对美国构成最大威胁的不是别人，恰恰是美国自己。
Some recent views expressed by US media and academia hold that the top geopolitical threat for the US is not from others, but itself.
当前，中国举国上下正在奋力抗击疫情，美方一些人却依然不遗余力抹黑攻击中国，这提醒我们：我们不仅需要防控新型冠状病毒，也要抗击意识形态和冷战残余病毒。
While the Chinese people are fighting the epidemic with one heart and one mind, certain individuals in the US continue attacking and smearing China. This is a sobering reminder that apart from the novel coronavirus, we also need to guard against virus of ideology and Cold War mentality.
问：世卫组织表示将派出一个联合专家组来中国参与防疫工作。
The WHO has said a multinational WHO-led team would go to China to work with Chinese authorities in tackling the outbreak.
请问专家组已经到中国了吗？
Have they arrived?
答：中方本着公开、透明、负责任态度，及时向世卫组织和国际社会通报情况，分享信息，并邀请世卫组织等相关专家前往武汉实地考察。
China has been sharing information with the WHO and the international community in an open, transparent and responsible manner, and has invited experts including from the WHO for field trips to Wuhan.
据了解，国家卫健委正就联合专家组访华具体安排同世卫组织保持密切沟通，具体情况请向卫健委询问。
We have learned that the National Health Commission is in close communication with the WHO on relevant arrangements for the joint expert group's visit to China. You may contact the National Health Commission for more details.
问：中方表示，中方完全有信心、有能力战胜疫情。
China said it has full confidence in its ability to defeat the coronavirus outbreak.
这是否意味着中方不再需要美国或其他国家的帮助？
Does this signal that China doesn't anticipate needing foreign aid from the U.S. and other countries?
答：中方始终主要依靠自身力量应对疫情挑战。
China has been relying mainly on its own strength to fight against this epidemic.
同时，对于来自国际社会的真诚友善的支持和帮助，我们表示欢迎和感谢。
At the same time, we welcome and appreciate the sincere and kind support and assistance from the international community.
问：据报道，除湖北武汉外，中国其他省市也采取了“封城”或即将采取“封城”措施。
According to reports, apart from Hubei and Wuhan, some other provinces and cities in China have been locked down or are expected to be locked down.
你能否证实？
Can you confirm that?
答：请向有关部门了解，并关注国家卫健委每天举行的新闻发布会。
I would refer you to the competent authorities and the daily press briefings hosted by the National Health Commission.
问：据了解，一些在武汉的印度公民未被允许登上印方撤侨的飞机。这些人的在华居留签证有效期即将失效。
I understand that the residence visa of some Indians who weren't allowed to board the evacuation flights from Wuhan is expiring soon.
请问他们该怎么办？
What should Indians facing this problem do?
答：我不掌握你说的情况，请向有关部门询问。
I'm not aware of what you mentioned and would refer you to the competent authority.
中方根据国际惯例，依照有关防疫规定为外国公民离开武汉提供必要便利和协助。
In accordance with relevant international practices and epidemic prevention and control measures, China offers convenience and facilitation to foreign nationals departing from Wuhan.
问：据报道，一些社交媒体平台的的数据显示，目前在中国大陆感染新型冠状病毒肺炎的死亡人数不止636人。对此你有何评论？
According to reports, the data circulated on some social media suggest that the number of people who were killed by the novel coronavirus pneumonia has exceeded 636.
答：国家卫健委每日发布和更新最新权威信息，请你密切关注。
Could you please clarify? You can follow the statistics that the NHC updates everyday.
问：昨天，中国外交部副部长秦刚约见意大利驻华大使方澜意，要求意方恢复与中国的直飞航班。
Yesterday Chinese Vice Foreign Minister Qin Gang asked Italy to resume direct flights during a meeting with Italian ambassador Luca Ferrari.
如果意方没有这么做，中方是否会采取反制措施？
Is China thinking about countermeasures if direct flights don't resume?
答：中意是友好国家，在中国抗击疫情的艰难时刻，意方向中方表示了支持，并向中方捐助了疫情防控物资。
China and Italy enjoy a friendly relationship. At this trying moment while China is fighting the outbreak, Italy expressed support to China and donated supplies for epidemic prevention and control.
昨天，马塔雷拉总统专门视察了罗马一所有很多中国学生就读的小学。
Yesterday, President Sergio Mattarella paid a visit to a primary school in Rome where many Chinese students are studying.
孔特总理也表示，因疫情而对华采取歧视性言行是愚蠢的。
Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte also said discriminatory remarks or deeds against China because of the epidemic are foolish.
这些都体现了意方对中国人民的友好感情。
These all show the friendly sentiments Italy holds towards the Chinese people.
疫情发生后，意方暂停两国直航，给两国公民旅行造成极大不便。
After the epidemic broke out, Italy suspended direct flights between China and Italy, causing great inconvenience to travelers.
中方就此多次做意方工作，表达关切，敦促意方遵从世卫组织建议，尽早取消暂停两国直航决定，从维护两国合作大局出发，不采取过度限制措施。
China has been working on the Italian side and expressed its concern, urging the Italian side to follow WHO advice, withdraw the suspension of flights as soon as possible and asking it not to take excessive restrictive measures for the sake of bilateral cooperation.
意方表示，意方重视中方关切，现阶段愿根据中方航空公司申请，尽快批准部分民航班次往返，并积极努力恢复两国间正常往来。
The Italian side said it takes China's concerns seriously, and based on the request of Chinese airlines, it is ready to resume some civil flights for normal exchange as soon as possible.
问：据报道，印度黑客近期对中国参与防疫的医疗机构发起过网络攻击，目的是窃取有关新型冠状病毒的敏感信息。
Media reported yesterday that Indian hackers are targeting Chinese medical institutions amid the Coronavirus outbreak, trying to extract sensitive data.
答：我们注意到媒体的有关报道。
We have noted relevant reports.
中方是网络大国，也是黑客攻击的主要受害国，坚决反对任何形式的网络攻击。
China is home to a large online community in the world and also a major victim of cyber hacking. We firmly oppose cyber attacks of any kind.
与此同时，中方主张国际社会应加强对话与合作，共同应对各类网络攻击，构建和维护和平、安全、开放、合作、有序的网络空间。
Meanwhile, we believe that the international community should strengthen dialogue and cooperation to jointly counter all kinds of cyber attacks and foster and uphold a peaceful, secure, open, cooperative and orderly cyberspace.
我想强调的是，中国正处于全力抗击疫情的非常时期。
I want to stress that China is now fighting this war against the epidemic with all-out efforts.
面对公共卫生危机，各国应团结合作，共克时艰。
At such an unusual time and in the face of a public health crisis, all countries should work together to tide over the difficulties.
问：上周六，李克强总理在与欧盟委员会主席冯德莱恩通话时表示，希望欧盟为中方通过商业渠道从欧盟成员国紧急采购医疗物资提供必要便利。
On Saturday, Premier Li Keqiang said he hoped that the EU will provide necessary convenience as China makes urgent purchase of medical supplies from EU member states through commercial channels.
请问相关物资运抵中国了吗？
Have any of these medical supplies arrived in China?
答：据我了解，截至2月7日中午，德国、法国、意大利、奥地利、匈牙利等欧盟国家已向中方捐赠了疫情防控物资。
I understand as of noon February 7, EU members including Germany, France, Italy, Austria and Hungary have all donated supplies for epidemic prevention and control to China.
很多其他欧盟国家都以不同方式表示支持中国抗击疫情。
Many other EU countries have also expressed support to us through various means.
问：据了解，针对外国人与其中国籍配偶的子女，中国政府不承认他们拥有外国国籍，你能否证实？外方在从武汉撤离这类人群时，因为要同中方协商而导致撤侨出现了延迟，这是否属实？
When it comes to the children of Chinese and foreign nationals who are born in China, is it true that the government policy is not to recognise their foreign nationalities? Was it the case that negotiations over evacuating such children have delayed several foreign evacuations from Wuhan?
答：据了解，对于外国在武汉公民的中国籍直系家属，考虑到家庭因素，如其本人愿意，且持有效国际旅行证件，可以随家人一同离开。
For Chinese nationals who are lineal relatives of foreign citizens in Wuhan, in light of their family ties, if they want to leave and also have valid international travel documents, they can leave with their families.
2020年2月6日外交部发言人华春莹主持网上例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Hua Chunying's Daily Briefing Online on February 6, 2020
首先跟大家通报一组数字：根据中国国家卫生健康委今天上午发布的统计数字，2月5日0-24时，中国境内新增治愈出院病例261例，新增死亡病例73例。
First, I'd like to share some data with you. According to the latest data this morning from the National Health Commission, between 00:00 and 24:00, February 5, 261 cured and discharged cases and 73 fatal cases were newly reported in China's mainland.
截至2月5日24时，中国境内累计治愈出院1153例，累计死亡病例563例。
As of 24:00 February 5, a total of 1,153 cured and discharged cases and 563 fatal cases have been reported in China's mainland.
自2月4日起，全国非湖北地区的新增确诊病例数连续两日下降。
Newly reported confirmed cases in China excluding Hubei declined for a second day starting from February 4.
问：有报道称，新型冠状病毒感染的肺炎实际确诊病例和死亡病例要比官方公布的多。
Some media informed that maybe the number of confirmed cases and dead persons are higher as the official figures are saying.
你对此有何评论？
What's your comment about it?
答：中国政府把人民生命安全和身体健康放在第一位，始终本着公开、透明和高度负责任的态度，及时通报信息，加强国际合作，建立举国体制，集全国之力，以最严格和最彻底措施抗击疫情。
The Chinese government puts people's life and health as its top priority. Acting with openness, transparency and a high sense of responsibility, it has been sharing information in a timely manner, enhancing international cooperation, putting in place a nation-wide scheme, pooling national resources and taking the most strict and thorough measures to fight the outbreak.
国家卫健委和武汉卫健委每天举行发布会，通报有关举措和进展。
The National Health Commission and the Wuhan health authorities hold daily briefings to keep the public updated.
中方公开透明和高度负责任的态度以及果断有力的举措得到了国际社会的普遍积极肯定。
China's openness, transparency and high sense of responsibility, and its decisive and effective measures have been recognized by the international community.
我们注意到，关于这次疫情出现了一些谣言和谎言，这比病毒本身更可怕。
We have noted some rumors and lies on this epidemic, which are worse than the virus itself.
你应该注意到，世卫组织总干事近日反复强调，希望各方不要信谣传谣。
You may have noted that even WHO Director-General has repeatedly called on people to not believe in rumors or spread them.
一些国家、政府有关部门也都加大了力度，采取果断措施，惩治疫情谣言制造者和散播者。
In some countries, relevant departments have been stepping up efforts to bring to justice those creating and spreading rumors about the epidemic.
问：据报道，由于肺炎疫情，中方考虑与美方协商启用中美第一阶段经贸协议中有关遭遇天灾等不可预知情况的相关条款。
Media reported that China is likely considering invoking the disaster-related clause in the Phase One trade deal with the U.S. and launching consultations on the matter due to the coronavirus outbreak.
中方对此有何评论？
Can you comment on whether China is deliberating such a step?
答：我不了解情况，请向有关部门询问。
I have no information on that. I would refer you to the competent authorities.
问：据报道，台湾地区官员赖清德在美国期间赴白宫与美国家安全委员会官员进行了约70分钟的会见。
Reports show that Taiwan official William Lai, during a personal trip to US, visited the White House and had a 70-minute meeting with US National Security Council officials.
中方是否认为这是台美政治安全关系热络的信号？这会产生什么影响？
Does China see this as another sign of warming political and security ties between Taiwan and the US?

What effects will it have?
答：中方坚决反对美台开展任何形式的官方往来，这一立场是一贯、明确的。
China firmly opposes official exchange between the US and the Taiwan region. This position is clear and consistent.
中方已就美方允许赖清德赴美活动向美方提出严正交涉。
We have made stern representations to the US side regarding the US allowing Lai Ching-te to attend activities in the US.
我们敦促美方恪守一个中国原则和中美三个联合公报规定，停止美台官方往来，不得安排美领导人、政府官员和国会议员同赖清德进行任何形式的接触，慎重妥善处理涉台问题，停止向“台独”势力发出错误信号，以免对中美关系造成严重损害。
We urge the US to abide by the one-China principle and the three China-US joint communiques and stop official exchange with Taiwan. It shall not arrange for contact of any form between US leaders, government officials, Congress members and Lai. It should prudently handle issues relating to Taiwan and stop sending wrong signals to Taiwan independence forces to avoid causing serious harm to China-US relations.
问：一些国家采取极端限制措施中断与中国之间的航班。
Some countries have gone to the extreme of suspending flights with China.
中方对此有何回应？
What is your response?
答：新型冠状病毒感染的肺炎疫情发生后，中方采取了最彻底、最严格的防控举措，防控工作正在取得积极成效。
Since the onset of the outbreak, the Chinese government has taken the most thorough and strict prevention and control measures, and such measures are increasingly showing their effects.
世卫组织高度赞赏中方应对疫情的有力举措，多次强调不赞成甚至反对对中国实施旅行和贸易等限制。
WHO lauded China's strong measures and stressed many times that it does not recommend and even opposes imposing restrictions on travel.
我们对有关国家无视世卫组织专业权威建议、不遵守国际民航组织的公告表示不满和反对，已向有关国家提出严正交涉。
We deplore and oppose those countries who went against WHO's professional recommendations and ICAO's bulletins and have lodged stern representations with them.
有关作法不仅无助于防控疫情，反而人为制造恐慌，严重干扰国际正常人员往来与合作，干扰国际航空运输市场秩序。
Their actions, which sowed panic among the public, will not help prevent and control the epidemic. They have gravely disrupted normal personnel exchanges, international cooperation and order of the international market of air transportation.
我们敦促有关国家谨慎考虑，不要过度反应，从维护双边交往合作大局出发，不要限制双方航空公司运营航线航班，按照世卫组织和国际民航组织的建议立即修改政策，纠正做法，以实际行动体现对中国抗击疫情的支持。
We urge the relevant countries to think carefully, not to overreact, nor restrict flights operated by airlines of the two sides, with bilateral relations and cooperation in mind. They should immediately correct their policies and wrongdoings in reference to recommendations of the WHO and ICAO and take concrete actions to support China's battle against the epidemic.
问：彭博社报道称，武汉暂时关闭离汉通道等举措正在取得积极效果，新型冠状病毒在中国其他地区传播速度正在放缓。
A Bloomberg report says that China sealed off Hubei province to save the world form the novel coronavirus outbreak.
这体现出一种深深植根于中华文化的“舍小家为大家”的理念，中国领导人在困难时期呼吁继续发扬这种精神。
It analyzes that "the idea of sacrificing one's self for a greater, national goal is deeply-embedded in Chinese culture, and is invoked by the country's leaders in times of hardships".
你对此有何评论？
I wonder if you can give a comment?
答：我注意到这篇报道。
I've noticed this article.
中国有一首脍炙人口的歌曲叫《国家》，“家是最小国，国是千万家”唱出了无数中国人的心声。
It reminds me of a popular Chinese song Nation with the line "a family is the smallest cell of a nation while a nation is thousands of families put together".
舍小家为大家、先国家后个人，从来都是中华文化的核心基因和中华民族的精神标识，是把中华儿女团结在一起的强大精神力量。
Indeed, as the lyric puts it, sacrificing one's family for all and putting the country before oneself has always been a spiritual hallmark of the Chinese nation ingrained in our genes. This is a strong bond uniting all Chinese people.
此次疫情发生后，中国政府始终把每一个公民的生命安全和身体健康放在第一位，尽最大努力确保每一位患者得到及时救治。
After the onset of this epidemic, the Chinese government, putting people's health first, has done its utmost to make sure every patient receives timely treatment.
同时，在当前这场疫情防控阻击战中，涌现出许许多多舍小为大、舍家为国的感人事迹，中国人的家国情怀在共同抗击疫情中得到了充分展现和诠释。
At the same time, we have seen so many touching stories of people sacrificing themselves for the greater good. The Chinese people's sense of responsibility to the country has been fully displayed in this joint fight against the outbreak.
正如习近平主席昨天会见柬埔寨首相洪森时指出的，中华民族是从艰难困苦中走过来的。
Just as President Xi pointed out while meeting with Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Sun yesterday, the Chinese nation has experienced hardships and difficulties.
中国有信心、有能力、有把握打赢这场疫情防控阻击战。
China has the confidence and the capacity to win this battle.
我们愿继续同国际社会加强合作，不仅维护中国公民的生命安全和身体健康，也为国际公共卫生事业作出贡献。
We will continue to enhance cooperation with the international community for the sake of Chinese citizens' health and global public health.
这两天北京下着雪，但是已经立春了。
It has been snowing for two days in Beijing. However, the Beginning of Spring, the first of the 24 solar terms, has already come.
冬去春来，万象更新。
As winter retreats and spring advances, everything will come back to life.
中国人民众志成城抗击疫情，一定能取得这场战役的最终胜利。
The Chinese people, fighting united as one, will surely defeat the epidemic.
问：有个别国家官员建议本国公民尽快离开中国，理由是担心中国将进一步采取旅行限制，未来数周难以保证搭乘商业航班飞离中国，请问发言人对此有何回应？
Officials in some countries suggest their citizens should leave China as soon as possible because there might not be commercial flights taking them to other countries in the next few weeks due to possible travel restrictions. I wonder if you have any comment?
答：这种说法完全是臆测。
That's just baseless assumptions.
疫情发生以来，中国政府始终高度重视中国人民和在华外国人的生命安全和身体健康，采取了最严格、最全面的防控措施，很多举措远超世卫组织建议和《国际卫生条例》要求。
After the epidemic outbreak, the Chinese government attaches high importance to the life and health of all people in China, Chinese and foreign nationals alike. We have taken the most comprehensive and rigorous prevention and control measures against the novel coronavirus, many of which have far exceeded what WHO and International Health Regulations required.
目前在华外国公民的安全、健康和生活是有保障的。
Currently the security, health and living standards of foreign nationals in China is guaranteed.
中国民航也已采取多种有效措施，保障国际航班旅客的安全健康，最大限度减少疫情通过航空器传播。
The Civil Aviation Administration of China has taken effective measures to minimize the possibility of virus spreading in airplanes and to ensure travelers' safety and health on international flights.
我们希望各方冷静、理性、客观地看待疫情及中方防控工作，不要过度反应。
We hope all countries can assess the epidemic situation and China's efforts in a calm, objective and rational manner and do not overreact.
中方的态度非常明确：中国民航不会停航。中国政府将继续尽一切努力把滞留海外的中国公民接回家。
China's position is clear: China's civil flights will not be suspended, and the Chinese government will take Chinese nationals home wherever they are.
问：前两天，你介绍了在华确诊感染病例中的外国公民数量，并介绍了中方为在华外国公民了解疫情信息提供的有关服务。
You talked about the number of foreign nationals confirmed of 2019-nCoV in China and the services China has provided for foreigners to know about the epidemic.
目前在华确诊的外国公民数量有无更新？中方还准备采取哪些措施解决在华外国公民的需求？
Is there any update on the number now? What other measures do you take to address foreign nationals' needs?
答：我们始终将中国人民和在华外国公民的生命安全和身体健康放在第一位，投入大量医疗、生活等资源同疫情作斗争。
We put the life and health of Chinese and foreign nationals in our country as the first priority and have mobilized enormous medical supplies and daily necessities to fight against the virus.
经向有关部门了解，截至2月6日中午，共有19名在华外国人确诊患有新型冠状病毒感染的肺炎，其中2人已治愈出院，17人正接受隔离治疗。
According to data from the competent authority, as of noon February 6, 19 foreign nationals have been confirmed of 2019-nCoV pneumonia, among them two have been cured and discharged from hospital while 17 are receiving treatment in isolation.
对于在华外籍人士，特别是在湖北武汉外国公民的合理关切和诉求，中方始终高度重视，积极采取有效举措努力加以解决。
China attaches high importance to addressing the concerns and demands of foreign nationals in China, especially those in Wuhan, Hubei Province.
此前我介绍过，中国各个地方和部门为在华外国公民及时提供疫情信息和相关咨询、加大多语种疫情防控信息推送。
The Chinese government has provided timely, multilingual information and advisory services on epidemic prevention and control to foreigners in China.
外交部及有关地方政府为外国驻华使领馆举办疫情防控情况通报会，及时回应外方关注的问题。
The foreign ministry and relevant local governments hold briefings on the situation of epidemic prevention and control for foreign embassies and consulates in China to respond to their concerns in a timely manner.
湖北省着力强化外国人的防疫救治，按照分级诊疗工作机制和加强网格化防控工作的要求，做好外国患者就诊引导服务工作。
Hubei province has strengthened the epidemic prevention and treatment concerning foreigners, and provided guidance to foreign patients in accordance with the tiered diagnosis and treatment system and as required by the community grid management.
中方还加强了对外国公民的保障和帮助。
We have strengthened the protection and assistance for foreign citizens.
很多地方省市都将当地外国人纳入基层政府和街道社区工作机制，保障其在生活、防疫、治疗等方面需求，对居住地的外国人采取帮扶措施。
Many provinces and cities have included foreigners living there in the working mechanism of local governments and communities to meet their needs in life, epidemic prevention and treatment and to offer support to them.
很多在华外国人士都对中方的关心、帮助以及采取的积极措施表示赞赏。
Many foreign nationals in China applaud the care and assistance they receive and other measures taken by China.
中方将继续像关心本国公民一样，关心在华外国人士的安全与健康，保障他们的生活与工作条件。
China will continue to care about the safety and health of foreigners in China as much as about its own citizens and guarantee their working and living conditions.
问：我们注意到《华尔街日报》昨天发表了一篇题为《中国是亚洲真正的病夫》的文章，利用肺炎疫情攻击中国。
Yesterday the Wall Street Journal carried an article "China Is the Real Sick Man of Asia", attacking China with the novel coronavirus outbreak.
请问中方对此有何评论？
Do you have a comment?
答：我注意到这篇报道。
We have seen this report.
这位叫作Walter Russell Mead的作者，你应该为自己的言论、你的傲慢、偏见和无知感到羞愧。
Walter Russell Mead, you should be ashamed of your words, your arrogance, your prejudice and your ignorance.
我想提请Mead先生注意以下几组数字：2009年美国爆发的H1N1流感死亡率高达17.4%。另外，根据美国疾病控制与预防中心1月底公布的报告，2019-2020年美国流感季已经导致1900万人感染，至少1万人死亡。
I want to draw Mr.Mead's attention to the following facts. The H1N1 flu that broke out in the US in 2009 has a mortality rate as high as 17.4%, and according to the report by the US CDC issued at the end of January, the 2019-2020 seasonal influenza in the US has infected 19 million people and killed at least 10,000 people.
对比这次中国肺炎疫情的实际情况，请问Mead先生，你又作何评论呢？
Compared with the current pneumonia outbreak in China, Mr. Mead, anything more you'd like to say?
问：近期，外国记者新闻中心（IPC）要求从外地返回北京的外国记者自我隔离14天，这是基于什么规定？
The IPC has now told foreign journalists they are required to self-quarantine for 14 days after their return from a place outside their city of residence. Under what health regulation is this requirement being made?
有关要求是针对所有在京的中外民众，还是只针对在京的外国人？
Are such requirements being made of all Chinese and non-Chinese citizens, or only of foreign journalists?
答：当前，中国正处于全力抗击疫情的非常时期。
China is at an unusual time as we are fighting an all-out war against this epidemic.
出于对人民群众生命安全和身体健康的关心，北京市和各个地方都分别发出了加强疫情防控工作的通知。
Putting people's safety and health first, Beijing and other localities have all issued notices on strengthening epidemic prevention and control efforts.
中国老百姓都予以理解，并积极配合，切实落实。
We have the understanding, coordination and cooperation of all Chinese people.
出于对在华外国记者的关心，IPC善意地提醒在华外国记者，这段时期特别要注意身体健康，做好个人卫生防护，在外采访务必遵守当地规定，听从有关安排，防止感染。
Out of concern for the foreign journalists stationed in China, the IPC kindly reminds them to take special care and mind personal hygiene, comply with local regulations and arrangements on their interview outings, and protect themselves from infection.
很多外国记者朋友都对我们的善意和关心表示了感谢，也都非常理解和配合。
Many foreign journalists thanked us for the considerate and kind reminders. They have also been most understanding and cooperative.
问：鉴于当前肺炎疫情，中方会推迟举行今年的“两会”吗？
Considering the coronavirus outbreak, is China considering delaying the annual meeting of the "two sessions"?
答：我没有听说。
I haven't heard of that.
我们正全力以赴，争取早日打赢这场疫情防控阻击战。
We are doing our best to fight the epidemic for an early victory.
问：据报道，中国昨天接回了滞留在新加坡的147名中国武汉公民。
China reportedly took home 147 Wuhanese from Singapore yesterday.
中方还会从其他国家接回仍滞留的中国公民吗？
Are you arranging evacuation of other Chinese citizens from anywhere else in the world?
答：由于一些国家不尊重世卫组织专业权威建议，不遵守国际民航组织公告，采取断航等极端限制措施，导致一些中国公民滞留海外。
After some countries resorted to extreme restrictions such as suspending flights despite WHO recommendations and ICAO bulletins, some Chinese nationals have ended up stranded overseas.
中国政府高度重视和关心，外交部和中国驻外使领馆积极协助他们通过改签机票、中转他国等方式回国。
The Chinese government attaches great importance to addressing this situation. The MFA and Chinese diplomatic missions overseas have been assisting them in getting back home by changing flight or transiting in another country.
同时，正紧急协调争取通过恢复航班等方式协助滞留人员回国。
At the same time, we have also been trying to get flights resumed to bring them home.
必须强调，一些国家停飞往返中国航班的做法不冷静、不理性，也不明智，直接影响了双边正常人员往来与合作，中方对此表示严重关切和强烈不满。
I must stress that certain countries' ill-advised decisions to suspend flights to and from China are neither cool-headed nor rational. It has had direct impacts on bilateral personnel exchange and cooperation. China expresses strong concern and deplores that.
希望有关国家从维护双边关系大局和人民利益出发，尽快恢复航班正常运营，为双方正常人员交往和合作提供保障。
We hope relevant countries will bear in mind overall relations and people's interests and resume normal operation of flights to guarantee normal people-to-people exchange and cooperation.
我再次强调，中国民航不会停航。
I want to stress again that China's civil flights will not be suspended.
中方将继续尽一切努力把滞留海外的中国公民接回家。
China will continue to do its utmost to bring home Chinese citizens stranded overseas.
问：中方是否会禁止受肺炎疫情影响的其他国家公民入境？
Would China consider banning entry of travelers coming from a country seriously affected by the coronavirus?
答：我们认为，面对疫情，当务之急是团结一心，加强合作，共同努力，尽快战胜疫情。
We believe that what is imperative at the moment is to unite and cooperate to achieve an early victory.
据我了解，中国各驻外签证机构和口岸签证机关运转正常，外国人可依照中国法律规定正常入境。
As far as I know, China's visa-issuing authorities abroad and port visa authorities are functioning normally. Foreigners have no problem entering China in accordance with China's relevant laws and regulations.
如有问题，可以查阅中国国家移民管理局官方网站、微博微信公众号，或向24小时值班电话86-10-66265110咨询。
If you have any inquiries, please refer to the official website, WeChat and Weibo accounts of China's National Immigration Agency or dial 24h hotline 86-10-66265110.
问：一些国家由于担心受肺炎疫情影响，可能考虑减少与中方开展留学等教育合作。中方是否在做这些国家的工作，以便与他们继续保持相关合作？
Is the government working to keep education partnerships and study abroad programs despite fears of the coronavirus pushing some to weigh cutting back academic programs and cooperation with China?
答：我们有信心尽快战胜疫情，与各国继续推进包括教育在内的各领域交流与合作。
We have confidence in winning the battle against the epidemic as soon as possible and will continue international exchange and cooperation in education and other areas.
问：基于中方目前采取的防疫措施，中方是否为控制疫情设置了时间表？
Considering the steps being taken to contain coronavirus, is China looking at a timeline to bring the epidemic under control?
答：我们希望通过全国人民的共同努力和国际社会的密切合作，尽快战胜疫情，越早越好。
With the concerted efforts of the Chinese people and close cooperation with the international community, we hope we'll win the battle against the epidemic as soon as possible.
问：我们注意到，中国驻纽约总领事近期表示，向支持中方抗疫的美方人士特别是美职篮（NBA）表示感谢。
We notice that Chinese Consul General in New York expressed gratitude to some people in the United States, and especially the NBA, for providing support for China's efforts to combat the coronavirus outbreak.
这是否说明中方对美方援助的态度转变了？
Does this suggest that the Chinese government's position and attitude changed on this issue?
答：疫情发生后，很多国家各界人士包括美国一些企业、机构和友好团体人士，纷纷向中方抗疫表示支持并提供帮助。
After the onset of the outbreak, people from all walks of life in many countries, including American companies, institutions, organizations and individuals, all supported China in this fight.
我们对来自国际社会的一切真诚和善意的帮助和支持表示感谢。
We thank all the sincere and kind assistance and support from the international community.
问：网络上有一段印尼警察演唱“武汉加油歌”的视频，在当地社交媒体上风靡一时。
Video of an Indonesian policeman singing the "Jiayou Wuhan" song goes viral in Indonesian social media.
视频中他还为武汉人民祈祷。
He also prayed for Wuhan people.
据了解，他以前从未去过中国，但会唱一些中文普通话歌曲。
He has never been to China before but is able to sing some Mandarin songs.
你对此有何评论？
What's your comments?
答：疫情无情人有情。
The virus is cold but there's warmth in humanity.
在中国抗击疫情的艰难时刻，有很多像这位名叫汉斯的印尼警察这样可爱的普通人，从全球各个角落，通过社交媒体给武汉加油，给中国打气。
During this difficult time, Wuhan city and China is cheered on through the social media by so many lovely people from all corners of the world like this Indonesian policeman.
“武汉加油”这个口号已响彻全球，为各国民众所熟知。
"Come on, Wuhan" is ringing across the globe and known by all.
请转告这位印尼朋友，疫情终将过去。我们欢迎所有支持武汉、喜爱中国的朋友来中国特别是武汉作客。
Let this friend from Indonesia know that the epidemic will pass one day, and when that day comes, we welcome all who support Wuhan and China to visit China, especially Wuhan.
问：据了解，今年79岁的黄锡璆教授是武汉火神山医院的设计师，他出生在印尼。
I heard Prof. Huang Xiqiu, a designer of Huoshenshan Hospital in Wuhan, was born in Indonesia 79 years ago.
印尼网民为他感到骄傲。
Indonesian netizens are proud of him.
你对此有何评论？
What's your response?
答：感谢你对中国抗击疫情的关心和关注。
Thank you for your care and attention for us.
黄锡璆老先生出生在印尼，成长在中国，在建筑业特别是医疗建筑方面享有崇高声誉，为中国抗击“非典”和此次疫情作出了重要贡献。
Prof. Huang was born in Indonesia and brought up in China. He claims great esteem in architecture, especially in medical architecture and has made important contributions to our battles against SARS and this epidemic.
感谢印尼朋友对黄老的关注，相信黄老对出生地也会留有深刻印象。
Thanks for noticing this detail and we believe that Mr. Huang also hold fond memories of his birthplace.
我们希望中国-印尼友好不断加深，结出更多硕果。
We hope China-Indonesia friendship will deepen and yield more fruitful outcomes.
问：据了解，最近从武汉回印尼的印尼学生目前状况良好。
The Indonesian students who returned from Wuhan recently are reportedly in good conditions in Indonesia.
目前印尼还未发现新型冠状病毒感染的情况。
So far Indonesia had no coronavirus case.
中方对此有何评论？
What is your opinion on this?
答：疫情发生以来，中方一直尽全力保障在湖北武汉的外国公民的生命安全和身体健康，为他们提供必要协助和便利。
Since the outbreak of the epidemic, China has spared no efforts to ensure the safety and health of foreign nationals in Hubei Province, including in Wuhan city. We also offered necessary assistance and facilitation for them.
我很欣慰地了解到回国的印尼学生状况都很好，欢迎他们在疫情结束后尽快返回中国学习生活。
I am glad to hear that the Indonesian students are in good condition, and when the epidemic is over, they are welcome to return and resume their study and life in China.
听说一些印尼民众对他们回国有些恐慌，这是完全没有必要的。
We heard that some people in Indonesia panic about these students coming back from China. This is completely unnecessary.
世界卫生组织明确表示，此次新型肺炎疫情并非“全球流行病”，希望大家冷静、理性、科学看待疫情，不要听信谣言，做出过度反应。
WHO has made it clear that the 2019-nCoV is not a pandemic. We hope that everyone can assess the epidemic situation in a calm, rational and science-based manner and do not buy rumors or overreact.
问：北京市政府三天前表示，对于没有湖北地区接触史的返京人员，如果体温正常可以正常上班。
The measures announced by the Beijing municipal government three days ago say those returning to Beijing - people who are not returning from Hubei - "can go to work" if their body temperature is normal.
IPC要求外国记者返京后自我隔离的理由是什么？
What is the regulatory basis for telling foreign journalists to self-quarantine if they return from travels anywhere outside Beijing?
答：当前形势下，面对疫情，每一个人都应该本着对自己和他人健康高度负责的态度，积极承担个人防病责任，履行应尽义务，共同行动战胜疫情。
Everyone should take responsibility for their health and those around them. It is everyone's duty to society. We need all-in efforts to win this battle.
你难道不认为IPC的善意提醒是出于对你和他人健康的关心和爱护吗？
IPC's kind reminder is out of concern for the health of you and people around you. Don't you agree?
2020年2月5日外交部发言人华春莹主持网上例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Hua Chunying's Daily Briefing Online on February 5, 2020
柬埔寨首相洪森将于2月5日来华访问。
Prime Minister Hun Sen of Cambodia will pay a visit to China on February 5.
问：国际社会高度关注中国新冠病毒感染疫情，很多国家纷纷表示愿提供支持和帮助。
As the international community pays high attention to the novel coronavirus outbreak in China, many countries have expressed willingness to provide support and assistance.
你能否介绍目前各国向中方提供援助的最新情况？
Can you update us on the international assistance China has received?
答：面对疫情，中方始终主要依靠自身力量应对疫情挑战。
In the face of the epidemic, China mainly relies on its own strength to tackle the challenge.
同时，对于来自国际社会的真诚友善的理解、支持和帮助，我们表示欢迎和感谢。
At the same time, we welcome and thank the sincere and friendly understanding, support and help from the international community.
根据我目前了解的情况，截至2月5日中午，韩国、日本、泰国、马来西亚、印尼、哈萨克斯坦、巴基斯坦、德国、英国、法国、意大利、匈牙利、白俄罗斯、土耳其、伊朗、阿联酋、阿尔及利亚、埃及、澳大利亚、新西兰、特立尼达和多巴哥等21个国家政府和联合国儿童基金会向中方捐助了疫情防控物资。
As far as I know, as of noon February 5, the governments of 21 countries, namely, the ROK, Japan, Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Pakistan, Germany, Britain, France, Italy, Hungary, Belarus, Turkey, Iran, the United Arab Emirates, Algeria, Egypt, Australia, New Zealand, Trinidad and Tobago, and UNICEF have donated epidemic prevention and control supplies to China.
不少国家社会各界友好人士也纷纷主动通过各种方式对中国抗击疫情提供支持。
Friends in many countries have also offered us support in various means.
捐赠有价，情义无价。
The donations speak volumes of their deep compassion.
患难见真情。我们在此向他们表示衷心的感谢。
A friend in need is a friend indeed. I'd like to thank them all.
中方将继续本着公开、透明和高度负责任的态度与世界各国分享信息、加强合作，不仅维护中国人民的生命安全和身体健康，也为维护全球和地区公共卫生安全作出努力和贡献。
China will continue to share information and strengthen cooperation with other countries in an open, transparent and highly responsible manner to safeguard the life and health of the Chinese people and contribute to regional and global public health security.
问：伊朗外长扎里夫在同王毅国务委员兼外长通话后，再次用中文发布推特，对中国抗击疫情的举措表示赞赏和感谢，还引用中国古语“岂曰无衣，与子同袍”，表示“伊朗坚定与中国站在一起”。
After talking to State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi on the phone, Iranian Foreign Minister Zarif again tweeted in Chinese to applaud and thank China’s efforts against the 2019-nCoV. He also quoted a line from an ancient Chinese poem “Together we stand, my armors thine”, noting that “Iran stands firmly with China”.
答：在这场抗击疫情的斗争中，我们并不孤单。
In this battle against the epidemic, China is not fighting alone.
全体中国人民万众一心、众志成城。
All Chinese people are united and determined.
很多友好国家也都通过各种形式表达对中国的支持，包括伊朗在内的许多国家都同我们坚定地站在一起。
Many friendly nations expressed their support for China through various means. Iran and many other countries are standing with us.
扎里夫外长是全球第一个公开声援中国的外长，这表达了伊朗人民对中国人民的真诚感情，体现了中伊两国传统友好的伙伴关系。
Foreign Minister Zarif was the first foreign minister to publicly support and encourage China, which in itself demonstrates the sincere and traditional friendship between Chinese and Iranian people.
伊方向中方提供了300万只医用口罩，并表示将继续提供援助，同中方齐心协力抗击疫情。
Iran has provided 3,000,000 surgical masks and expressed readiness to offer more assistance as China fights against the virus.
我们对伊朗朋友在中国抗疫战役的关键时刻给予宝贵支持表示衷心的感谢。
We sincerely thank our Iranian friends for their valuable support at such a critical moment.
面对这场突如其来的疫情，柬埔寨首相洪森、韩国总统文在寅等国家领导人和各界人士都表示，“中国的困难就是我们的困难”。
Faced with the sudden virus outbreak, Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Sen, ROK President Moon Jae-in and many other state leaders and people from all walks of life said that “we see China’s difficulties as our own”.
在此我想说，中国的胜利就是你们的胜利，中国的胜利就是世界的胜利。
Here I’d like to say China’s victory is also a victory for you and the world.
中方正在以最严格、最全面的措施抗击这场疫情。
China is taking the most rigorous and comprehensive measures against the 2019-nCoV.
昨天新增治愈出院病例约4倍于新增死亡病例，累计治愈出院病例是累计死亡病例的近2倍。
To quote yesterday’s data, cured and discharged cases were about four times of deaths. The total number of patients cured and discharged so far is nearly twice of those died of the virus.
中国完全有能力、有信心早日战胜疫情，不仅维护中国人民的生命安全和身体健康，也为世界公共卫生安全作出贡献。
We have full confidence and capability in winning this battle at an early date. We do this for not only the Chinese people but also global public health.
问：4日，世卫组织总干事谭德塞表示，一些国家当前所采取的贸易或旅行限制措施可能会增加恐惧感，对公共卫生几乎没有好处。
WHO Director-General Dr. Tedros said on February 4 that trade and travel restrictions taken by some countries “can have the effect of increasing fear and stigma, with little public health benefit".
WHO传染病危害及预防司司长布里安德表示，WHO将对有关国家采取限制措施的理由寻求澄清，希望各国重新调整从中国撤侨政策。
Sylvie Briand, WHO director of global infectious hazard preparedness, said the WHO was seeking clarifications on the justifications for restrictions adopted by some countries and hoping countries would reconsider plans to evacuate nationals from China.
中方对此有何评论？
What’s your comment?
答：疫情发生以来，中国政府一直本着对人民健康高度负责的态度，采取了最全面、最严格的防控举措，很多举措远超出《国际卫生条例》要求，被世界卫生组织总干事称赞为“设立了应对疫情的新标杆”。
Since the onset of the outbreak, the Chinese government, putting people’s health as the top priority, has taken the most comprehensive and strict prevention and control measures, many of which far exceed IHR requirements. It has been lauded by WHO Director-General Dr. Tedros as setting a new standard for outbreak response.
世卫组织近期多次反复强调，没有理由采取不必要的国际旅行限制措施，呼吁国际社会勿信谣言，坚持科学。
The WHO also reiterated that there is no ground for unnecessary travel restrictions and called on the international community to reject rumors and believe in science.
针对有关疫情，绝大多数国家对中方抗击疫情举措表示赞赏和支持，对近期中国公民入境采取或加强检疫防疫等措施，对此我们表示理解和尊重。
The vast majority of countries have expressed appreciation and support for China’s prevention and control measures. We understand and respect their appropriate response such as border screening and quarantine measures on Chinese travelers.
与此同时，也有一些国家对中国疫情作出过激反应，采取过度应对措施，显然与世卫组织建议背道而驰。
At the same time, some countries have overreacted with excessive measures, which clearly runs counter to WHO recommendations.
中方希望各国能够客观公正、冷静理性地评估疫情，尊重世卫组织权威专业建议，理解和支持中国政府防疫努力，采取有关措施应符合世界卫生组织建议，不应超出合理限度，避免影响正常国际人员往来和各领域务实合作。
We hope that all countries can assess the epidemic situation in an objective, fair, calm and rational manner, respect WHO recommendations, and understand and support China's epidemic control efforts. The measures they take should be in line with WHO recommendations and not exceed reasonable levels to avoid affecting normal personnel exchanges and practical cooperation.
恐慌是更可怕的传染病。
Fear is more horrible and infectious than virus.
面对公共卫生危机，各国应当团结合作，共克时艰，而不应隔岸观火，更不应落井下石，这符合各国的共同利益。
Faced with a public health crisis, countries should work together to overcome difficulties instead of just watching the fire burn across the river or making things worse for those in difficulties. This is in everyone’s interests.
问：你能否证实习近平主席访日行程不会因肺炎疫情推迟？
Can you confirm that President Xi Jinping’s trip to Japan will not be postponed due to the virus situation?
答：中日双方都在密切关注疫情发展，并保持沟通。
Japan is following the development of the epidemic together with China and the two sides are in communication.
双方一致认为应继续共同努力，为顺利推进下阶段重大外交议程做好各方面准备工作。
The two sides agree that joint efforts should be made to prepare for the next-stage major diplomatic agenda.
问：中方将与来访的柬埔寨首相讨论哪些议题？为何没有安排他去武汉看望柬学生?
What will the Chinese side discuss with the visiting Cambodian Prime Minister and why wasn’t he arranged to see the Cambodian students in Wuhan?
答：洪森首相今天来华访问，习近平主席、李克强总理将分别会见。
Prime Minister Hun Sen is coming to China today. President Xi Jinping and Premier Li Keqiang will meet with him respectively.
洪森首相高度评价中方为抗击疫情采取的各项措施，坚信中方会克服当前困难，表示柬埔寨人民将同中国人民患难与共。
Prime Minister Hun Sen speaks highly of China’s efforts against the epidemic and firmly believes that China will overcome current difficulties at an early date. He also said that the Cambodian people will share weal and woe with the Chinese people.
我们完全理解洪森首相对柬学生的关心。
We fully understand that Prime Minister Hun Sen cares deeply for the Cambodian students in China.
考虑到武汉正全力开展疫情防控工作，加上时间仓促，此次不便安排洪森首相去武汉。
Considering the fact that Wuhan is doing all it can to fight the outbreak and given the tight schedule, a visit to Wuhan at this moment cannot be properly arranged.
中方高度重视保障柬在华学生的安全与健康，将像爱护自己的学生一样，全力维护和保障好他们的生活学习条件和健康安全。
China attaches great importance to the health and security of Cambodian students in China. We will do our best to care for them as our own and make sure they have all they need during their study in China.
问：据一些美国媒体报道,美国针对疫情采取的全面限制措施将严重伤害依赖中国产品或面向中国客户的美国公司。
According to some US media, the full-scale restrictive measures taken by the US in response to the epidemic will gravely hit US companies that rely on Chinese products or Chinese customers.
穆迪公司经济学家认为，美有关限制措施将导致中国赴美游客减少,进而影响美国经济。
Moody economist believed that such restrictive measures will lead to a reduction of Chinese tourists which will affect the US economy.
高盛日前发布报告指出,美限制措施将导致中国游客减少28%，消费支出减少58亿美元，美今年一季度经济将损失0.4个百分点。
Goldman Sachs on Friday said it expects the virus to dent the US economic growth in the first quarter by 0.4 percentage points as tourists from China will be reduced by 28% and their expenditure cut by $5.8 billion.
答：我们也注意到，连日来不少国家媒体智库、专家学者都对一些国家采取的过度限制措施的不利影响表示担忧。
We have also noted that for several days, media, think tanks, experts and scholars of many countries have voiced their concerns over the excessive restrictive measures taken by some countries.
世卫组织已多次强调，不建议各国采取任何旅行或贸易限制措施，呼吁各国不要听信谣言，坚持科学，采取基于证据的措施。
WHO has stressed many times that it does not recommend measures that unnecessarily interfere with international travel and trade and called on all countries to combat the spread of rumors, stick to science and take evidence-based measures.
我们希望有关国家能尊重世卫组织的专业权威建议，以科学、理性的态度看待和应对，不要过度反应。
We hope that the relevant countries will respect WHO’s recommendations and make rational and science-based response to the current situation instead of overreacting.
根据美国媒体报道，美当季流感已导致1900万人被感染，1万多人死亡。
According to statistics from American media, the seasonal influenza in the US has infected 19 million people and caused over 10,000 deaths.
而此次疫情，中国境外感染病例不到中国国内病例的1%。
By contrast, the number of infected cases of the 2019-nCoV outside China accounts for less than 1% of that in China.
2月1日起，治愈人数已开始超过病死人数。
Starting from February 1, the number of people cured has exceeded that of deaths.
截至2月4日24时，累计治愈出院892例，约2倍于累计死亡病例。
As of the end of February 4, altogether 892 patients were cured and discharged, almost twice as many as those died of the virus.
新增疑似病例连续第二天下降。
The number of newly suspected cases has dropped for a second day in a row.
恐慌是更可怕的传染病。
Panic is more deadly and contagious than any virus.
应对疫情应建立在科学而不是恐慌的基础上。
All the responses to the epidemic should be based on science instead of fear.
全球化时代，各国利益交融，命运相连。
In a globalized era, all countries’ interests and future are intertwined.
面对公共卫生危机，各国只有团结合作、共克时艰，才能真正维护好各国的共同利益。
In the face of a public health crisis, all countries should bond together and tide over difficulties with solidarity so as to safeguard the common interests of all.
问：近日，中国信息通信研究院和IMT-2020（5G）推进组共同发布了《5G安全报告》。
China Academy of Information and Communications Technology and IMT-2020 (5G) Promotion Group recently published a 5G Security Report.
请问中方对此有何评论？
Do you have any comment on it?
答：近日，中方有关5G领域专业研究机构发布了《5G安全报告》，系统梳理了关键技术、典型应用场景及产业生态的安全风险，提出了安全理念和应对思路措施，并对后续加强各方互信合作、更好地推动5G发展与安全进行了展望。
This 5G Security Report released by 5G research institutes in China offers a systemic view of potential security risks in key technologies, typical application scenarios and industrial ecology, proposes security concepts and corresponding protective measures, and envisions strengthening mutual trust and cooperation to promote secure 5G development.
5G是新一代信息通信技术演进升级的重要方向，加快5G发展将对各国政治、经济、文化、社会等各领域发展带来全方位、深层次影响，将进一步重构全球创新版图，重塑全球经济结构。
As a new generation of information and communications technology continues to evolve and upgrade, accelerated development of 5G will have multifaceted and profound political, economic, cultural and social impacts all over the world. It will reconstruct the global innovation landscape and reshape the economic structure.
各国在推动数字经济发展、应对安全风险挑战方面有共同诉求。
Countries are in similar places when it comes to promoting the growth of digital economy and dealing with challenges posed by security risks.
各方应坚持开放合作安全理念，客观看待5G网络安全风险,在各方普遍参与的多边平台讨论制定5G安全的全球标准和规则。
All countries should embrace the concept of open and cooperative cybersecurity, view 5G network risks in an objective manner, and discuss and formulate global standards and rules of 5G security at multilateral platforms where all parties can participate.
国际社会应在相互尊重、相互信任的基础上，为5G技术发展提供开放、公平、公正和非歧视性的环境，共同把握新一轮科技革命带来的巨大发展机遇，实现互利共赢、共同发展。
With mutual respect and trust, the international community should provide an open, equitable, fair and non-discriminatory environment for 5G technologies and grasp the huge opportunity for development in the new round of scientific and technological revolution, so as to achieve mutual benefit and common development.
问：美国总统特朗普在发表年度国情咨文时表示，当前美中关系处于最好时期，但过去几十年中国一直在占美国便宜。特还称近期达成的中美第一阶段经贸协议是美方取得的“胜利”。
President Trump has delivered his State of the Union address, in which he said his administration has the best relationship with China and yet accused China of taking advantage of the US for decades, calling the recent trade deal “a win” for the US.
对此你是否同意？
Would you agree to what he said?
答：关于中美第一阶段经贸协议相关问题，中方已多次阐明有关立场。
As for questions relating to the phase one trade deal, China has talked about its position many times.
保持中美关系健康稳定发展，符合两国和两国人民根本利益，也是国际社会普遍期待。
Sound and steady development of bilateral relations serves the fundamental interests of the two countries and peoples and meets the aspiration of the international community.
希望美方同中方相向而行，认真落实两国元首达成的重要共识，在相互尊重的基础上管控分歧，在互惠互利的基础上拓展合作，共同推进以协调、合作、稳定为基调的中美关系。
We hope that the US will work with us to implement the important consensus reached between the two heads of states, manage differences based on mutual respect, expand mutually beneficial cooperation, and jointly move forward China-US relations featuring coordination, cooperation and stability.
问：英国政府表示，在中国的英国公民应尽可能都离开中国。请问你对此有何评论？
What is your reaction to the British government telling its citizens to leave China if they can?
答：中国政府始终高度重视所有中外人员的生命安全和身体健康，采取了最严格、最全面的防控措施，远超世卫组织建议和《国际卫生条例》要求。
The Chinese government attaches high importance to the life and health of all people, Chinese and foreign nationals in China alike. We have taken the most comprehensive and rigorous prevention and control measures against the novel coronavirus, which have far exceeded what WHO and International Health Regulations required.
我们有信心、有能力、有条件打赢这场防疫阻击战。
We have every confidence, capability and condition to win this battle.
世卫组织明确表示，新型冠状病毒感染的肺炎疫情并非“全球流行病”，中国政府已采取强有力的措施阻断病毒蔓延，呼吁国际社会勿信谣言、坚持科学、加大防控以及治疗力度。
The WHO clearly says that the outbreak does not constitute a pandemic and that the Chinese government has taken strong measures to contain the spread of the virus. It also calls on the international community to reject rumor, believe in science, and step up prevention and treatment.
谭德塞总干事也多次强调，不建议仓促撤侨，最好的办法是留在原地并做好自我防护。
Dr. Tedros has stated repeatedly that he does not recommend pulling out foreign nationals, as the best thing to do is stay put and take proper self-protection.
希望各方冷静、理性、客观地看待疫情及中方防控工作，尊重世卫组织专业权威建议，不要过度反应。
We hope that all countries can assess the epidemic situation in a calm, objective and rational manner, respect authoritative and professional WHO recommendations and don’t overreact.
问：特朗普在今天发表年度国情咨文时表示，美方正与中方就抗击疫情开展合作。
President Trump said in his State of the Union Address that they’re working closely with China on the coronavirus outbreak.
你能否介绍具体情况？
Could you possibly specify any cooperation in this respect?
答：当前，中国政府和人民正在全力以赴抗击新型冠状病毒疫情。
At the moment, the Chinese government and people are sparing no efforts to fight the 2019-nCoV pneumonia outbreak.
我们采取了果断、有效措施，全力遏制疫情蔓延，防控工作正在逐步取得成效。
We have taken decisive and effective measures to rein in its spread, and prevention and control measures are increasingly showing their effects.
我们完全有信心、有能力打赢这场疫情防控阻击战。
We are fully confident and capable of winning the hard battle against this epidemic.
我们本着公开、透明和负责任的态度，及时向世卫组织以及美国在内的有关国家和地区作了通报，第一时间分享了病毒基因序列等信息，并邀请世卫组织和中国港澳台地区的专家前往武汉实地考察。
In an open, transparent and responsible manner, China timely informed WHO, the US and other countries and regions. We shared the genome sequence of the coronavirus at the earliest time possible and invited WHO and experts from Hong Kong SAR, Macao SAR and Taiwan on field trips to Wuhan.
中方防疫努力得到世卫组织及国际社会充分肯定和高度评价。
China’s efforts are fully recognized and highly lauded by WHO and the international community.
中美通过外交、卫生等渠道就疫情应对进行了密切沟通。
China and the US are in close communication on the situation through diplomatic and health channels.
流行性疾病无国界，需要各国合力应对。
Infectious disease knows no border and should be handled with concerted efforts.
当前疫情防控处于关键阶段。
We have come to a crucial stage in terms of epidemic prevention and control.
世卫组织呼吁不要对国际旅行和贸易采取不必要的干预措施，以免增加国际社会恐慌。
WHO advises against measures that unnecessarily interfere with international travel and trade to avoid more panic.
希望美方采取客观公正、冷静理性态度，不作过度反应，尊重和配合中方防控努力，同中国和国际社会一道抗击疫情，维护全球公共卫生安全。
We hope the US will adopt an objective, just, calm and rational view, refrain from overreaction, respect and collaborate with China’s efforts, and work together with China and the rest of the international community to fight the epidemic and safeguard global public health security.
问：美国企业是否向中国提供了捐赠援助？对于美方专家以及美疾控中心等组织所提供的帮助，中方有何评论？
Have US companies donated items to support China? And what is China’s view for the work being done by US-based scientists and organizations like the CDC?
答：据向国家卫健委了解，美方派出专家参加了中国—世卫组织联合专家考察组。
China’s National Health Commission has confirmed that the US sends experts to join a China-WHO joint expert group.
中方正与世卫组织就联合专家组相关事宜进行磋商。
China is in consultation with WHO on the relevant arrangements for the joint expert group.
希望美方尊重世卫组织专业权威建议，客观公正、冷静理性，不做过度反应，尊重和配合中方的防控努力。
We hope that the US will respect WHO’s authoritative and professional recommendations, react in an objective, fair, calm and evidence-based manner, rather than excessively. It should respect and coordinate with China's prevention and control measures.
我们了解到，美国一些企业和机构也对中国抗击疫情表示支持并提供了援助。
We have learned that some US businesses and institutions have also offered support and assistance.
我刚刚得到消息，来自美方的一批援助防疫物资于2月4日运抵武汉。
I’ve just heard that a batch of supplies from the US has just arrived in Wuhan on February 4.
问：能否介绍柬埔寨首相洪森访华安排？中国领导人是否会同洪森首相会见？对于他想去武汉的请求，中方作何回应？
What is Hun Sen’s itinerary in China? Will he meet with state leaders? How did you respond to his request to go to Wuhan?
答：我刚刚回答了法新社的问题，请你查阅。
Please refer to my answer to AFP.
问：我们注意到，近几天中国新型冠状病毒肺炎的新增确诊病例大部分来自武汉，这体现了中国政府把控疫情局面的能力。
In recent days most of the newly confirmed cases were found in Wuhan. I believe it shows the Chinese government's ability to control the situation.
昨天，湖北《长江日报》报道，中国工程院院士、国家卫健委高级别专家组成员李兰娟团队在武汉公布治疗新型冠状病毒肺炎的最新研究成果。
We also noted yesterday that the Changjiang Daily reported the good news about the latest research results by the team led by Li Lanjuan, academician of China Engineering Academy and member of the high-level expert panel of the National Health Commission. So my question is, how long do the health authorities expect the growth of number to probably last?
中方认为确诊病例数量增加的趋势还会持续多久？近期，很多航空公司因疫情暂停来往中国的航线，中方估计何时会恢复正常？
As we understand, many airlines have temporarily suspended flights to China due to the outbreak. When does China expect this to return to normal?
答：关于疫情，国家卫健委每天都举行发布会，及时通报相关信息。
The National Health Commission holds daily press briefings to keep the public updated.
我注意到，昨天，新增死亡病例65例，新增治愈出院病例262例。
I note that there were 65 death cases and 262 cured and discharged yesterday.
截至2月4日24点，累计死亡病例490例，累计治愈出院病例892例。
As of the end of February 4, the total death toll is 490 and altogether 892 have been cured.
新增疑似病例连续第二天下降。
The number of newly suspected cases dropped for a second day in a row.
我们希望拐点早日到来。
We hope to see the inflection point at an early date.
世卫组织强调，不建议甚至反对实施旅行限制。
WHO stressed that it does not recommend and even opposes imposing restrictions on travel.
对此，国际民航组织也强烈敦促各国遵循世卫组织建议。
The International Civil Aviation Organization also strongly urges all countries to heed WHO recommendations.
中国民航已采取多种有效措施，保障国际航班旅客的安全健康。
The Civil Aviation Administration of China has taken effective measures to ensure travelers’ safety and health on international flights.
我们希望有关国家尊重世卫组织专业权威建议，不要过度反应，不要限制双方航空公司运营航线航班，以免影响正常国际交往与合作。
We hope the relevant countries will respect WHO’s recommendations instead of overreacting or restricting flights which affect normal international exchanges and cooperation.
与此同时，国际旅客的正当权益应当得到重视和保障。
The legitimate rights and interests of international travelers should be valued and protected, too.
问：土耳其向中方提供了医疗援助。
Turkey provided medical help to China in the fight against the epidemic.
两国外长也进行了通话，分享了疫情相关信息。
Turkish and Chinese foreign ministers also had a phone call and shared messages.
中方对此有何评论？
Any comments on that?
答：2月1日，王毅国务委员同查武什奥卢外长通电话。
On February 1, State Councilor Wang Yi had a phone call with Foreign Minister Mevlüt ?avu?o?lu.
查武什奥卢外长充分肯定中方抗击疫情的强有力举措，相信中方完全有能力战胜疫情，表示土方已向中方提供必要医疗物资，并愿根据中方需要提供更多帮助。
Foreign Minister Mevlüt ?avu?o?lu commended China’s effective measures against the epidemic and believed that China is absolutely capable of defeating it. He said that Turkey has provided medical supplies to China and stands ready to offer more support in accordance with China’s need.
中方感谢土方在中方防控疫情的关键时刻向中方提供医疗物资，这体现了土方对中国人民的友好情谊。
China thanked Turkey’s timely assistance which showcased the friendship between Turkish and Chinese people.
问：据报道，一名曾搭乘过豪华邮轮“钻石公主号”的香港乘客确认感染新型冠状病毒。
A Hong Kong passenger who boarded the luxury cruise ship Diamond Princess has been confirmed with novel coronavirus infection.
该邮轮停泊在日本横滨港外，正在进行检疫。
The ship is under quarantine off the Japanese port of Yokohama.
邮轮上有10名乘客确认感染新型冠状病毒，其中有中国公民。
Ten passengers, including Chinese nationals, reportedly have contracted the novel coronavirus.
请问，你能否提供更详细的情况？
Can you give us more details?
答：我也刚刚看到有关报道，不了解详细情况。
I also just saw the reports and don’t have the specifics.
会后将向有关部门了解。
I will check with relevant departments afterwards.
2020年2月4日外交部发言人华春莹主持网上例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Hua Chunying's Daily Briefing Online on February 4, 2020
问：我们注意到中方今天上午表示，中方希望美方的援助早日到位。
China said this morning that it hopes the relevant assistance from the United States will be provided as soon as possible.
请问中美双方是否就援助细节进行协商？涉及哪些方面？
Are China and US now discussing the details of this assistance? What kinds of assistance are involved?
答：中方注意到美方多次表示愿意向中方提供援助。
We noted that the US repeatedly expressed readiness to offer China assistance.
希望美方的援助早日到位。
We hope such assistance will materialize at an early date.
问：你能否提供确诊感染新型冠状病毒肺炎的在华外国人的具体情况？比如说国籍、年龄等信息？
Can you provide more details (age, nationality, etc.) on the foreigners in China who have been infected with the novel coronavirus?
答：出于对当事人个人隐私的保护，我们不便透露当事人国籍信息。
To protect the privacy of the people involved, we don’t think it appropriate to disclose their personal information, including their nationalities.
问：昨天在世卫组织执委会第146届会议上，世卫组织总干事谭德塞再次强调，防范是必要的，但无需过度反应。
In the 146th WHO Executive Board Meeting yesterday, Director-General Dr. Tedros stressed again that where precaution is necessary, there’s no need for overreaction.
世卫组织不建议各国采取任何旅行或者贸易限制措施，呼吁各国采取基于证据、令人信服的措施。他同时也警告了谣言和错误信息传播的危害。
WHO advises against travel or trade restrictions, calls on all countries to implement decisions that are evidence-based and convincing, and warns of the dangers posed by the spread of rumors and misinformation.
请问中方对此有何评论？
I wonder if you have any comment?
答：我们注意到有关报道。世卫组织总干事谭德塞近日多次强调，“这是一个需要事实而不是恐惧的时刻”。
As we noted, WHO Director-General Dr. Tedros repeatedly stressed that this is the time for facts, not fear.
病毒固然可怕，但比病毒更可怕的是谣言和恐慌。
Virus is horrible. What’s more horrible is rumors and panic.
因此，世卫组织一直呼吁各国基于事实采取令人信服的措施。
WHO has been calling on countries to implement decisions that are evidence-based.
事实是，疫情发生以来，中方采取了空前严格的防控举措，其中很多都超出了世卫组织的建议和《国际卫生条例》的要求。
The fact is that since the onset of the outbreak, China has taken unprecedentedly strict prevention and control measures, many of which far exceed WHO recommendations and IHR requirements.
根据世卫组织2月3日发布的疫情报告，全球除中国外共有153例确诊病例，不到中国境内病例的1%，而2009年美国H1N1流感蔓延到214个国家和地区。
According to a WHO report released on February 3, there are altogether 153 confirmed cases of the 2019-nCoV outside China, which is less than one percent of the number in China. In contrast, in 2009, the H1N1 flu in the US spread to 214 regions and countries.
正是由于中方的努力，才有效防止了疫情向其他国家蔓延。
Thanks to China’s efforts, we have effectively contained the cross-border spread of the 2019-nCoV.
中方为抗击疫情采取的举措被世界卫生组织称赞为“设立了应对疫情爆发的新标杆”。
WHO applauded China, saying it’s setting a new standard for outbreak response.
事实是，根据媒体报道，2009年甲型H1N1流感死亡率高达17.4%；2012年中东呼吸综合征死亡率为34.4%；埃博拉疫情死亡率是40.4%。
The fact is that according to media reports, the 2009 H1N1 flu had a mortality rate of 17.4%. The mortality rate of MERS of 2012 was 34.4% and Ebola 40.4%.
此次在中方的不懈努力下，目前中国境内新冠病毒疫情死亡率约2.1%，远低于以往其它疫情。
With China’s unrelenting efforts, the 2019-nCoV mortality rate in China is about 2.1%, much lower than the figures above.
2月1日起，治愈人数开始超过病死人数。
Since February 1, cured cases began to outnumber deaths.
截至2月3日24时，累计治愈出院病例632例。
As of 12am February 3, a total of 632 patients have been cured and discharged.
我们有信心、有能力战胜这场疫情。
We have the confidence and the capability to win this battle.
事实是，世卫组织发布新型冠状病毒感染的肺炎疫情为国际关注的突发公共卫生事件，主要目的是为卫生体系脆弱、公共卫生能力不足的国家提供必要国际援助。
The fact is that the major purpose that the WHO declared the 2019-nCoV a public health emergency of international concern is to help ill-prepared countries with weaker health systems to get necessary international assistance.
世卫组织不赞成甚至反对对中国采取旅行禁令，并且多次表示中国采取的举措坚定有力，对中方战胜疫情始终充满信心。
The WHO doesn’t approve of and even rejects travel and trade bans on China. It has said repeatedly that China has taken firm and strong actions, and that it is confident in China winning this battle.
一些防疫能力强大、防疫设施先进的发达国家率先采取过度的限制措施，这与世卫组织的建议相违背。
However, it was precisely some developed countries with sound health systems and advanced public health capabilities that imposed excessive restrictions on China, which clearly runs counter to WHO advice.
即便一些美国媒体和专家也都认为，过度限制措施恰恰是世卫组织反对的，并不能真正降低病毒扩散的风险。
Even American media and experts doubted the government’s decision, saying that the US government’s restrictions on China are precisely what the WHO rejects and cannot really reduce risks of virus spreading.
我还注意到，有德国媒体报道表示，面对疫情，如果我们充满同情帮助之心，那么恐惧和恐慌就会退却。
German media stated that in front of the epidemic, if we are compassionate and ready to help, fear and panic will fade away.
如果在疫情挑战面前失去人性，那输掉的就不仅是一场对抗疾病的战役。
If we lose humanity, it will not just be a battle against disease that we lose.
我想强调，病毒无国界。
I want to stress that virus knows no borders.
疫情是一时的，而合作是长久的。
The epidemic is temporary, but cooperation lasts.
面对公共卫生危机，各国应当团结合作，共克时艰，这符合各国的共同利益。
Faced with the public health crisis, countries should work together to tide over the difficulties. It serves the common interests of all.
问：中国新型冠状病毒疫情牵动着世界人民的心，我们注意到，很多日本网友不约而同聚拢到中国驻日本使馆社交媒体账户评论区，给武汉加油，给中国打气，发言人对此有何评论？
The world is watching the epidemic in China with care and concern. We have seen many Japanese netizens gathering under social media accounts of the Chinese embassy in Japan, telling China to stay strong and showing support to Wuhan. Do you have a comment?
答：我也看到了有关报道，非常感动。
I have also seen relevant reports and I am deeply touched.
此次疫情发生以来，无论是日本政府还是社会各界，都给予了中国很多同情、理解和支持。
Since the outbreak of the epidemic, the Japanese government and people have expressed sympathy, understanding and support to us.
疫情一发生，日本政府就表示将全力协助中国抗击疫情。
The Japanese government made it clear very soon since the outbreak of the epidemic that it will do whatever needed to help China fight the epidemic.
日本政府和日本许多地方、企业主动向中方捐赠口罩、护目镜、防护服等防疫物资。
The Japanese government and businesses have donated to China masks, goggles, protective suits and other supplies for epidemic prevention and control.
一些捐赠给武汉的物资包装箱上写着“山川异域，风月同天”、“岂曰无衣，与子同裳”。
On the packages donated to Wuhan read the words “Though miles apart, we are under the same sky” “Together we stand, my armors thine”.
我还从网上看到一些照片，在日本的一些药妆店，可以看到“中国加油”、“武汉加油”的标语。
Going online, I saw photos with slogans put up at many drug stores in Japan reading “Stay strong, China” “Come on, Wuhan”.
东京晴空塔专门点亮了红色和蓝色，为中国武汉抗击疫情祈愿和加油。
The Tokyo Skytree has been lit up in red and blue to cheer up and pray for China.
针对个别国家出现的极端歧视性言论，日本厚生劳动省官员在记者会上表示，“坏的是病毒，而绝非是人”。
An official from the Japanese Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare denounced extreme and discriminatory remarks from some countries at a press conference, saying what is at fault here is virus, definitely not people.
我还听说，有日本学校给学生家长写信，教育孩子们不要带着恶意去谈论中国武汉。
I heard that one headmaster of a Japanese school sent a letter to parents, telling pupils that this is not the time to badmouth China and Wuhan.
我想很多中国网民和我一样都注意到了日本人民这些温暖人心的举动。
I believe many Chinese netizens have also noticed these heartwarming details.
在当前抗击疫情的艰难时刻，我们对其他国家人民给予中国的同情、理解和支持表示衷心感谢，铭记在心。
We thank all the countries for their sympathy, understanding and support during this difficult time. We will keep these in our heart.
病毒无情人有情。
What the virus has done is cruel and will not last.
疫情是一时的，友情是长久的。
What the people has done is touching and will be remembered forever.
我们将继续同国际社会一道，全力争取打赢疫情防控阻击战，早日恢复正常的工作生活秩序，与各国人民继续开展友好交往。
We will continue to work with the international community to fight against the epidemic with all-out efforts. We will strive to return to normal life at an early date and continue our friendly exchanges with people from all countries.
问：据报道，当地时间3日，国际货币基金组织（IMF）总裁格奥尔基耶娃表示，对受到新型冠状病毒肺炎疫情影响的中国人民表示诚挚慰问，支持最近一段时间以来中国政府应对疫情所作的努力，并对中国经济继续展现极强的韧性充满信心。
According to media reports, on February 3 local time, IMF Managing Director Kristalina Georgieva expressed deep sympathies to all those affected by the serious situation related to the coronavirus, support for China’s efforts to respond , and confidence that China’s economy remains resilient.
答：我也注意到有关报道，对格奥尔基耶娃女士友好表态表示感谢。
We have also seen relevant reports and appreciate Ms. Georgieva’s remarks.
2月3日，中国国家发展改革委副主任连维良在国新办记者会上表示，疫情对当前中国经济特别是对消费的影响加大。
The deputy head of the NDRC Lian Weiliang said at the State Council press conference on February 3 that the epidemic is influencing China’s economy, especially consumption, and such influence is increasing.
但这种影响是阶段性的、暂时的，不会改变中国经济长期向好的基本面。
But it is temporary and will not change the fundamentals of China’s economy which will remain sound for a long term.
我们有能力、有信心打赢疫情防控阻击战，把疫情对经济的影响降到最低。
We are capable of and confident in winning this hard battle against the epidemic and will strive to minimize its impact on China’s economy.
我们对中国经济的未来充满信心。
We are fully confident in the prospect of China’s economy.
问：据报道，意大利取消了两国直飞航班。你认为意方的行为是否属于反应过度？
Do you think Italy “overreacted” considering that it stopped flights with China?
答：你也知道世卫组织明确强调，不建议甚至反对实施旅行限制。
As you may know, the WHO has made it clear that it does not recommend and even opposes travel restrictions against China.
中国政府正在全力抗击疫情，本着公开、透明、负责任的态度发布信息，并采取最全面、最严格的防控举措，得到国际社会的充分肯定和高度评价。
The Chinese government is making all-out efforts to combat the epidemic, releasing information in an open, transparent and responsible manner, and taking the most comprehensive and rigorous prevention and control measures. All this has been fully recognized and highly appreciated by the international community.
中方理解一些国家为了防止疫情传播采取适当管制措施，但希望各国客观公正、冷静理性地评估疫情，理解和支持中方防疫努力，采取的措施应符合世卫组织建议，不应超出合理限度，避免影响正常人员往来和各领域务实合作。
China understands that some countries have taken appropriate measures to prevent and control the spread of the epidemic, but hopes that all countries can assess the epidemic situation in an objective, fair, calm and rational manner, understand and support China's epidemic control efforts. The measures they take should be in line with WHO recommendations rather than exceed reasonable levels, and should not affect normal personnel exchanges and practical cooperation in various fields.
问：据报道，在巴基斯坦恢复中巴之间的航线后，目前已有300多人回到巴基斯坦。
After resumption of China-Pakistan airlines, media reports suggested three hundred passengers so far returned to Pakistan.
你认为中巴恢复航线是否会促使其他国家作出同样决定？
Does this step help airlines of other countries to resume operation?
答：中巴一直相互坚定支持。
China and Pakistan have been firmly supporting each other.
我们希望有关国家针对疫情所采取的措施都能在合理限度内，避免影响正常人员往来。
We hope all countries’ response to the 2019-nCoV will be rational so as not to affect the normal personnel exchanges.
问：据报道，巴基斯坦方面明天将举行抗议活动，目的是表达对克什米尔地区人民的支持。
Pakistan is to hold protests tomorrow to express support for people in Kashmir.
答：中方在克什米尔问题上的立场是一贯的、明确的。
China's position on the issue of Kashmir is consistent and clear.
克什米尔问题是历史遗留下来的争议，应当根据《联合国宪章》、相关安理会决议以及双边协定，以和平方式加以妥善解决。
It is a dispute left over from history and should be resolved properly and peacefully in accordance with the UN Charter, relevant Security Council resolutions and bilateral agreements.
作为印、巴的共同邻国，中方呼吁双方通过对话和平解决争议，共同维护地区和平稳定。
As a neighbor to both India and Pakistan, China calls on the two countries to peacefully resolve disputes through dialogue and jointly maintain regional peace and stability.
问：昨天，你提到一些国家针对疫情所采取的措施属于“反应过度”。
Yesterday you mentioned that some countries have overreacted.
德国已经派机接走了在武汉的本国公民，这是不是反应过度？
Does this include Germany seeing that Germany has sent a plane to evacuate its citizens from Wuhan?
答：德国向中方捐赠了抗疫物资，德方领导人表达了对中国的支持。
Germany has donated supplies to help us fight the epidemic, and German leaders expressed their support for us.
中方也为德方接走其在武汉的一些公民提供了必要协助。
China has also assisted Germany in flying some of its nationals out of Wuhan.
问：中方是否计划邀请拉美和加勒比国家的医疗专家参与研究新型冠状病毒及开发相关疫苗的工作？
Does China have plans to invite Latin American and Caribbean experts to join investigations on the coronavirus and the development of a vaccine?
答：中方一直本着公开、透明和负责任态度与世卫组织和国际社会开展合作。
China has been cooperating with the WHO and the international community in an open, transparent and responsible manner.
具体情况请向国家卫健委了解。
I refer you to the National Health Commission for more information.
问：据了解，一个中国代表团取消了本周在印度参加军事相关博览会的计划，你能否证实？
A Chinese delegation canceled its participation at a defense expo in India this week. Could you confirm this?
答：我不掌握情况，请向主管部门了解。
I’m not aware of that and refer you to the competent authorities.
问：第一个问题，日本政府证实一名60多岁日本男性感染新型冠状病毒肺炎，正在武汉的医院接受治疗。
First, the Japanese government has confirmed that a 60-year-old Japanese man contracted pneumonia and was admitted to a hospital in Wuhan.
中方昨天表示有16名在华外国人确诊感染肺炎，其中包括我说的这名日本人吗？第二个问题，你昨天介绍在华外国人确诊感染肺炎的情况，“在华”的确切含义是什么？
Did the 16 foreigners infected in China as you said yesterday include this man in his 60s? Second, speaking of the cases of foreigners in China, does that include places outside China’s mainland or only refer to the mainland?
答：关于第一个问题，我能告诉你的是，出于对当事人个人隐私的保护，我们不便透露当事人信息。
On your first question, we are not in a position to disclose such information for the protection of the privacy of the people involved.
关于第二个问题，我理解是中国境内。
On your second question, my understanding is that it is China’s mainland.
问：据报道，俄罗斯近期可能遣返新型冠状病毒肺炎患者。
In recent days, some media reported that Russia may repatriate patients with the new coronavirus pneumonia.
中俄是否就此进行了沟通？
Have China and Russia discussed this issue? What is China's comment?
答：我们注意到，2月3日晚，俄政府领导人作出澄清，俄方将把本国境内的疫情患者完全治愈后，再由其自行做出去留决定。
We have noted that on the evening of February 3, the Russian government leader clarified that the patients in Russia will make their own decisions on leaving or staying after they are cured.
目前，俄境内确诊的新冠肺炎患者共2名，均为中国公民。
At present, there are two confirmed cases in Russia, and both are Chinese citizens.
他们正接受俄方专业救治，情况良好，中方对此表示感谢。
They are receiving professional treatment from the Russian side and are in good conditions. We appreciate that.
下一步，中方愿继续同包括俄方在内的国际社会开展密切协作，共同应对疫情。
Going forward, we will continue our close coordination with the international community, including Russia.
2020年2月3日外交部发言人华春莹主持网上例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Hua Chunying's Daily Briefing Online on February 3, 2020
各位记者朋友好！我是外交部发言人华春莹。
Good afternoon. I'm Hua Chunying, spokesperson of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
欢迎大家参加外交部首场网上例行记者会。
Glad to see you in our ministry's first online press conference.
非常时期，非常方式。
It's an unusual platform at an unusual time.
相信很快我们就可以照常在蓝厅见面啦！
But I believe we will be seeing each other in Lanting soon.
下面请大家开始提问。
Now I'm happy to take your questions.
问：近日，个别国家相继宣布对中国公民入境采取限制措施，其中美国将赴华旅行风险级别提升到最高级别，并从2月2日起临时禁止过去14天内曾赴华旅行的所有外国人员入境。
Some countries announced travel restrictions on Chinese citizens. Specifically, the US has raised its China travel advisory to the highest level and temporarily banned the entry of all foreigners who traveled to China in the past 14 days starting from February 2.
对此，中方有何评论？
I wonder if you have any comment?
答：疫情发生以来，中国政府一直本着对人民健康高度负责的态度，采取了最全面、最严格的防控举措，很多举措远超出《国际卫生条例》要求，被世界卫生组织总干事称赞为“设立了应对疫情的新标杆”。
Acting with a high sense of responsibility to people's health, the Chinese government has taken the most comprehensive and strict prevention and control measures after the outbreak of the epidemic, many of which have far exceeded what International Health Regulations required. As the WHO Director-General noted, China is setting a new standard for outbreak response.
世卫组织总干事谭德塞明确表示，宣布新型冠状病毒疫情为“国际关注的公共卫生突发事件”的原因，并非是对中国投下“不信任票”，与之相反，世卫组织对中国控制疫情的能力怀有信心，没有理由采取不必要的国际旅行限制措施。
In the same speech, he said specifically that declaring a public health emergency of international concern is not a vote of no confidence in China. On the contrary, WHO continues to have confidence in China's capacity to control the outbreak. There is no reason for measures that unnecessarily interfere with international travel.
针对有关疫情，绝大多数国家对中方抗击疫情举措表示赞赏和支持，对近期中国公民入境采取或加强检疫防疫等措施，对此我们表示理解和尊重。
Most countries appreciate and support China's efforts to fight against the novel coronavirus, and we understand and respect them when they adopt or enhance quarantine measures at border entry.
与此同时，也有一些国家，特别是美国对中国疫情作出过激反应，采取过度应对措施，显然与世卫组织建议背道而驰。
But in the meantime, some countries, the US in particular, have inappropriately overreacted, which certainly runs counter to WHO advice.
美国政府迄今未向中方提供任何实质性帮助，却第一个从武汉撤出其领馆人员，第一个提出撤出其使馆部分人员，第一个宣布对中国公民入境采取全面限制措施，不断制造和散播恐慌，带了一个很坏的头。
The US government hasn't provided any substantiveassistance to us, but it was the first to evacuate personnel from its consulate in Wuhan, the first to suggest partial withdrawal of its embassy staff, and the first to impose a travel ban on Chinese travelers. What it has done could only create and spread fear, which is a very bad example.
就连美国媒体和专家都对美政府措施表达了质疑，表示“美政府对华采取的限制措施恰恰是世卫组织反对的，美方正在从过分自信转变到恐慌和过分应对。禁止过去14天内曾赴华旅行外国人入境等措施也有侵犯公民权力的嫌疑，而且并不能真正降低病毒扩散的风险”。
Even American media and experts doubted the government's decision, saying that the US government's restrictions on China are precisely what the WHO rejects, that the US is turning from overconfidence to fear and overreaction, and that banning the entry of visitors who traveled to China in the past 14 days is suspected to be violating civil rights instead of reducing risks of virus spreading.
实际上，根据美国疾病控制与预防中心近日报告，美国2019-2020年流感季已经导致1900万人感染，至少1万人死亡。
In fact, according to a recent CDC report, the US flu from 2019 to 2020 has caused 19 million infection cases and at least 10,000 deaths.
截至2月2日，中国确诊感染新型冠状病毒肺炎17205例，死亡361人，治愈475例。美国国内仅11例确诊。
By contrast, by February 2, 17,205 cases of nCoV pneumonia were confirmed, 361 died and 475 cured and discharged, while there are only 11 confirmed cases in the US.
这些数字对比发人深思。
The contrast is thought-provoking.
我注意到，加拿大卫生部长明确表示，加拿大不会跟随美国限制中国人以及去过中国的外国人入境，认为禁止入境的做法没有依据，也不合理。这与美方的行为形成鲜明对比。
I also noted that the Canadian Minister of Health said Canada won't follow the US and impose travel restrictions on Chinese or foreign nationals who have been to China. Canada believes the ban of entry has no basis, which is a sharp contrast to the US behaviors.
我们希望有关国家理性、冷静、科学判断和应对。
We hope countries will make reasonable, calm and science-based judgments and responses.
中方愿继续本着公开透明和高度负责任态度，与世界卫生组织和国际社会加强合作。
In an open, transparent and highly responsible attitude, China will enhance cooperation with the WHO and the international community.
我们也有信心、有能力，尽快打赢这场战役。
We have confidence and capability in winning this battle as soon as possible.
问：加拿大政府表示，加拿大一架飞机正在越南等候中方批复的落地许可，以便飞赴中国武汉接回本国公民。
The Canadian government says it is waiting for Chinese government clearance to send an aircraft from Vietnam to pick up Canadian citizens from Wuhan.
请问中方何时批准加方申请？
Can you tell me when you expect this authorization to be provided?
答：中方高度重视保护在湖北武汉的各国公民的生命安全和身体健康，积极采取有效措施，及时解决他们的合理关切和要求。
China attaches great importance to the life and health of Chinese and foreign nationals in Wuhan and takes effective measures to address their concerns and needs in a timely manner.
对于撤离本国在武汉公民的国家，中方根据国际惯例，依照中方有关防疫规定，做出相应安排并为此提供必要协助和便利。
For countries wishing to evacuate their citizens out of Wuhan, we make arrangements and provide assistance to them following international customary practices and our epidemic control measures.
有关国家都对中方表示感谢。
Relevant countries have expressed thanks to us.
据我了解，中加就有关事宜保持沟通。
I understand China and Canada are in communication on this.
问：截至目前，多少国家已经向中国提供了人道主义援助？哪些国家正准备向中方提供援助？现在中国最需要的物资是什么？
How many countries have provided humanitarian aid to China so far? Which countries are preparing to send it? And which items does China need the most?
答：疫情发生以来，一些国家通过不同方式向中方表达了抗击疫情的理解和支持。
Since the novel coronavirus pneumonia outbreak, some countries have expressed understanding and support to China through various means.
截至2月2日中午，韩国、日本、英国、法国、土耳其、巴基斯坦、哈萨克斯坦、匈牙利、伊朗、白俄罗斯、印度尼西亚等11国和联合国儿基会向中方捐助的疫情防控物资已运抵中国。
As of noon February 2, epidemic prevention and control supplies donated by the ROK, Japan, the UK, France, Turkey, Pakistan, Kazakhstan, Hungary, Iran, Belarus, Indonesia and the UNICEF have arrived in China.
此外，一些国家各界友好人士也纷纷主动通过各种方式对中国抗击疫情表示支持。
In addition, friends in many countries have also offered us support.
患难见真情，在此一并向他们表示感谢！
A friend in need is a friend indeed. I'd like to thank them all.
我们现在最急需的是防疫医疗物资，如医用口罩、防护服、护目镜等。
What we urgently need at present are medical supplies for prevention and control, masks, protective suits and safety goggles among other items.
问：台湾方面抱怨称，意大利基于世卫组织坚持台湾是中国的一部分，将台湾地区列入新型冠状病毒肺炎疫情“高危地区”，禁止台湾方面往来意大利的航班。
Taiwan has complained that Italy has banned flights from Taiwan due to the WHO listing Taiwan as part of China as a "high risk" area from the coronavirus.
中国是否会要求世卫组织将中国同台湾地区“区分”，以便台湾航班不受意方禁令的影响？
Will China ask the WHO to list Taiwan separately so its flights are not affected by flight bans?
答：台湾同胞是我们的骨肉同胞，在海外的台湾同胞如果遇到困难，我们愿提供大力协助。
Taiwan compatriots are our brothers and sisters. If they encounter difficulties overseas, we are always ready to help.
同时，WHO是由主权国家组成的联合国专门机构，台湾参与WHO等国际组织活动，必须在一个中国原则下通过两岸协商作出安排。
The WHO is a special UN agency consisting of sovereign states. Taiwan's participation in the activities of international organizations such as the WHO must be arranged properly through cross-strait consultations under the one-China principle.
这些安排都确保了无论是岛内还是国际上发生突发公共卫生事件，台湾地区均可及时有效应对。
With these arrangements in place, Taiwan is able to cope promptly and effectively with local or global public health emergencies.
问：中国是否在同有关国家协商不要对中国公民入境采取限制？对于限制中国公民入境的国家，中方是否感到失望？
Is China in discussions with other countries about not imposing restrictions? Is China disappointed with those restricting Chinese citizens' entry?
答：中方出于对本国公民生命安全和身体健康的高度重视，采取了最严格、最全面的防控措施，远远超过世界卫生组织建议和《国际卫生条例》的要求。
Attaching great importance to people's life and health, China has taken the most strict and comprehensive control measures that are far exceeding WHO recommendations and IHR requirements.
世界卫生组织总干事谭德塞明确表示，世卫组织发布新型冠状病毒感染的肺炎疫情为国际关注的突发公共卫生事件，主要目的是为卫生体系脆弱、公共卫生能力不足的国家提供必要国际援助。
As WHO Director-General Dr. Tedros noted, declaring a public health emergency of international concern is to help countries that have weaker health systems and are ill-prepared.
世卫组织不赞成甚至反对对中国采取旅行禁令，并且多次表示中国采取的举措坚定有力，对中方战胜疫情始终充满信心，当前形势下应保持镇定，没有必要过度反应。
WHO doesn't approve of and even rejects travel bans on China. It has said repeatedly that China has taken firm and strong actions, that it is confident in China winning this battle, and that countries need to stay calm instead of overreacting under the current circumstances.
绝大多数国家听取世卫组织建议，采取了合理的防疫措施，我们对此表示理解。
We understand the reasonable measures taken by most countries to enhance quarantine following WHO advice.
但令人遗憾的是，恰恰是美国等一些防疫能力强大、防疫设施先进的发达国家率先采取了过度的限制措施，这与世卫组织的建议相违背。
However, regrettably, it was precisely the US and some other developed countries with sound health systems and advanced public health capabilities that imposed unnecessary or even excessive restrictions on China, which clearly runs counter to WHO advice.
我们希望有关国家客观、理性看待疫情及中方防控工作，按照《国际卫生条例》有关规定及世卫组织提出的专业、权威建议，采取适当举措，避免对国际旅行形成不必要干扰。
We hope some countries will see the epidemic and China's efforts in an impartial and rational manner, follow IHR provisions and the professional, authoritative advice of WHO, and take proper measures that won't unnecessarily interfere with international travel.
问：昨日，巴基斯坦方面表示，不会从中国湖北撤回本国公民。并表示中国有更好的医疗设施应对疫情。
Pakistan said yesterday it will not be evacuating citizens from Hubei, saying that China has better medical facilities to handle the outbreak.
请问是否有其他国家通过外交渠道表达了和巴方相近的观点？
Are there other countries who have expressed the same view in diplomatic discussions?
答：的确，巴基斯坦总理和外长都表示，高度赞赏并坚定支持中方抗击疫情的努力，感谢中方为巴在华公民提供帮助，相信中方能够充分发挥制度优势战胜疫情，巴基斯坦人民坚定地与兄弟的中国人民站在一起。
Indeed, as Pakistani Prime Minister and foreign minister noted, they highly commend and firmly support China's efforts to fight against the nCoV. They also appreciate China's assistance for Pakistani citizens in China and express confidence in China winning this battle with the strength of its system. The Pakistani people are standing firmly with their Chinese brethren.
还有很多国家像巴基斯坦一样，对中国抗击疫情表达了充分的信心和信任，我们对此表示感谢。
Like Pakistan, many other countries have also expressed full confidence in China. We thank them.
我们有信心也有能力尽快战胜疫情，保障好这些国家在华公民的生命安全和身体健康。
We have the confidence and the capability to win the fight against the outbreak as soon as possible and safeguard the life and health of their citizens in China.
问：今年，习近平主席访问日本的计划是否会受疫情影响改期？
Will President Xi's visit to Japan this year be affected by the outbreak?
答：我们一直同日方保持密切沟通。
We've been in close communication with Japan.
中日双方应继续共同努力，为顺利推进下阶段重大外交议程积极做好各方面准备工作。
The two sides should continue working together and make sound preparations for the major diplomatic agenda in the near future.
问：你能否介绍发生在湖南H5N1禽流感的情况？
Is any update on recent cases of H5N1 bird flu in Hunan?
答：农业农村部已就此发布消息，请上网查阅。
I'd refer you to information available online from the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs.
问：美方仍称中方拒绝美方提供的帮助，这是否属实？
The US still says China is refusing US offer of help. Is this accurate?
答：疫情发生以来，一些国家通过不同方式向中方抗击疫情提供支持和援助，我们对此表示感谢。
Since the outbreak of the epidemic, some countries have provided support and assistance to help China fight against the epidemic through various means. We are grateful for that.
但据我所知，美国政府迄未向中方提供任何实质性帮助。
But as far as I know, the US government has not provided any substantive help to the Chinese side yet.
相反，美国第一个从武汉撤出领馆人员，第一个提出要撤出部分使馆人员，第一个在世卫组织明确表示不建议甚至反对对华采取旅行和贸易限制措施后，反其道而行之，宣布采取全面禁止中国公民入境举措，制造和散播恐慌情绪。
On the contrary, it was the first to withdraw its consulate staff from Wuhan, the first to suggest the partial withdrawal of embassy staff, the first to announce a ban on entry by Chinese citizens after the WHO made it clear that it doesn't recommend and even opposes travel and trade restrictions against China. What the US has done could create and spread panic.
全球化时代，各国命运紧密相连。
In a globalized world, the destinies of all countries are closely linked.
面对公共卫生危机，各国应当携手应对、共克时艰，而不是以邻为壑，更不应乘人之危。
In the face of a public health crisis, countries should work together to overcome the difficulties, rather than resort to beggar-thy-neighbor practice, let alone take advantage of others' difficulties.
中方本着公开、透明和负责任的态度同世界卫生组织和国际社会加强合作。
China has strengthened cooperation with the WHO and the international community in an open, transparent and responsible manner.
自1月3日起，共30次向美方通报疫情信息和防控措施。
Since January 3, we notified the US of the epidemic and our control measures altogether 30 times.
两国疾控中心就疫情相关情况多次进行沟通。
Chinese Center for Disaster Control and Prevention and US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention held many rounds of communications on the outbreak.
1月29日，中国卫健委通过官方渠道答复美方，欢迎美国加入世卫组织联合专家组。
On January 29, China's National Health Commission replied through official channel to the US that we welcome it to join a WHO joint expert group.
当天美方即回复表示感谢。
The US thanked China for this on the same day.
1月31日，美方通过官方渠道告中国卫健委，美方已联系世卫组织总部，并向世卫组织提交了希望加入世卫组织联合专家组的美国专家名单。
On January 31, the US told China's National Health Commission that it had contacted WHO headquarters and submitted a list of US experts wishing to join the group.
中方将继续与世卫组织以及包括美国在内的有关国家加强合作，维护各国公民生命安全和身体健康。
China will continue cooperating with WHO and countries concerned including the US to safeguard the life and health of people of all countries.
问：中国是否将从其他国家撤离更多本国公民，特别来自湖北武汉的中国公民？
Is China going to evacuate more of its citizens, those from Wuhan, Hubei especially, from other countries?
答：近期，受疫情影响，一些出境旅游的湖北特别是武汉公民在海外遇到一些实际困难。
Due to the coronavirus outbreak, some Hubei citizens, especially those from Wuhan traveling overseas find themselves in difficult situations.
中国政府高度重视，对滞留海外的湖北特别是武汉公民回国问题作出妥善安排，充分体现了中国政府始终把人民群众的冷暖安危放在心头，始终坚持以人为本的执政理念。
Placing high importance on this, the Chinese government decided to make proper arrangements to bring them home. This shows how it always puts people's well-being first and its commitment to people-first governing philosophy.
外交部迅即行动，在短短两天时间里，顺利协调安排4架次民航包机将自愿回国的399名中国公民接回武汉，再次展现了中国速度和中国情怀。
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs took swift actions. In two days, we arranged for 4 chartered flights to bring home 399 Chinese citizens who wanted to return, showing the impressive speed of a caring motherland.
我们将继续密切跟踪形势发展，采取必要措施帮助滞留海外的中国公民特别是湖北武汉公民。
We will continue to closely monitor the situation and take all necessary steps to help Chinese citizens, especially those from Wuhan, Hubei stalled in foreign countries, to tide over their difficulties.
如在海外的中国公民遇到这方面的困难和问题，可以拨打外交部全球领事保护与服务应急热线12308。
Overseas Chinese citizens in need can reach our Global Emergency Call Center for Consular Protection and Services via the 12308 hotline.
问：近日，一些国家出现了针对中国疫情的恐慌、甚至侮辱性、歧视性的言论。
Recently, we've seen panic and even insulting and discriminatory comments about China's epidemic in some countries.
答：病毒无情人有情。
The merciless virus has brought out great warmth from our fellow human beings.
面对这场突如其来的疫情，连日来，很多国家政府官员和各界人士都对中国抗击疫情表达了同情、信任和支持，有很多话、很多行动都令我们十分感动，对此，我们都会铭记在心。
In response to this unexpected epidemic, government officials and people from all walks of life in many countries have expressed sympathy, confidence and support for China's fight against the epidemic in recent days. We're deeply moved by what they've said and done for us, which will never be forgotten.
我们也注意到，近日在个别国家、个别媒体出现了极个别极端和不理性的言论。
In the meantime, we noted that a few extreme and irrational remarks have appeared in certain media of certain countries.
对此，我们坚决反对。
We firmly reject them.
世卫组织总干事谭德塞强调，“这是一个需要事实而不是恐惧的时刻，是需要科学而不是谣言的时刻，是需要团结而不是羞辱的时刻。”
As WHO Director-General Dr. Tedros put it, "This is the time for facts, not fear. This is the time for science, not rumors. This is the time for solidarity, not stigma."
我们希望国际社会能够理性、冷静地认识这场疫情，并作出科学、恰当地应对。
We hope that the international community can view the epidemic in a rational and calm way and make a science-based and measured response.
中方愿继续本着公开透明和高度负责任的态度，同各国加强合作，维护好中国人民的生命安全和身体健康，同时为地区和全球公共卫生安全作出贡献。
China will continue to work more closely with other countries in an open, transparent and highly responsible manner to safeguard the life and health of the Chinese people and contribute to regional and global public health security.
问：新型冠状病毒感染的肺炎疫情发生以来，中方有没有采取什么措施保障在湖北武汉等地的外国公民的健康安全？外国在华人士可通过哪些渠道了解中方疫情防控的进展？
What measures has China taken to safeguard the health security of foreign nationals in China, especially Wuhan since the outbreak of the novel coronavirus? How can they access information on China's prevention and control efforts?
答：中方高度重视在华外籍人士，特别是在湖北武汉的各国公民的生命安全和身体健康，积极采取有效措施，及时解决他们的合理关切和要求。
Attaching high importance to the well-being of foreign nationals in China, especially Wuhan, Hubei, China has taken effective measures to address their concerns and needs in a timely manner.
第一，为给在湖北的外国朋友提供肺炎疫情相关咨询和协助，湖北省有关部门开通了针对在鄂外籍人士、外国留学生以及外籍旅游团队的24小时咨询服务热线（027-87122256），并在官方网站和湖北外事微信公众号及时推送英法德俄日韩西多语种疫情通报和防疫知识。
First, Hubei has set up a 24 hour hotline (027-87122256) for foreign citizens, students and tour groups in the province to access advice and assistance. In addition, its official website and the WeChat account of Hubei Foreign Office promptly relayed information on the epidemic situation and epidemic prevention knowledge in English, French, German, Russian, Japanese, Korean and Spanish.
北京、上海、天津、广东、江苏、新疆等多个省区市也向工作生活在当地的外籍人士致公开信，介绍并提供了解疫情防控、定点救治等信息和渠道，并结合本地实际，加强对在当地外国人的信息分享、服务等工作。
Many provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities like Beijing, Shanghai, Tianjin, Guangdong, Jiangsu and Xinjiang have sent open letters to foreign citizens working and living there, sharing with them information channels and designated treatment centers and offering services in light of local realities.
第二，外交部在英文网站开设了“抗击新型冠状病毒感染肺炎疫情”专栏，及时汇总更新卫健委发布有关疫情防控权威信息，方便外国朋友及时了解。
Second, the MFA has set up a special column entitled "Fighting 2019-nCoV" on its website, gathering the latest information from the National Health Commission to keep foreign readers updated.
第三，为帮助外国朋友了解相关预防知识，国家移民管理局根据中国疾病预防控制中心发布的《新型冠状病毒感染的肺炎公众预防提示》，翻译了英、法、俄、德、日、韩6种外文版本，外国朋友可以上网查阅。
Third, to help equip foreign nationals in China with prevention know-how, the National Immigration Administration translated the Public Prevention of Pneumonia Caused by Novel Coronavirus released by the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention into six foreign languages, namely English, French, Russian, German, Japan and Korean. They are all readily available online.
我们也将有关多语种提示通过驻外使领馆进行广泛发布推送。
Chinese diplomatic missions overseas have also been disseminating multilingual versions of the document.
中方采取的防控措施远远超过了世卫组织和《国际卫生条例》建议的措施，目的是尽最大努力，在最短时间内阻止疫情扩散。
The measures China has taken have gone far beyond WHO and IHR recommendations. We are doing our best to contain the spread of the coronavirus within the shortest time possible.
我们有信心、有能力打赢这场战役。
We have the confidence and the ability to win this battle.
请在华的外国朋友不必过度惊慌。
There is no need for any panic from foreign friends in China.
正如谭德赛总干事建议那样，这是一个需要事实而不是恐惧的时刻；这是一个需要科学而不是谣言的时刻；这是一个需要团结而不是羞辱的时刻。
As Director-General Dr. Tedros put it: This is the time for facts, not fear. This is the time for science, not rumors. This is the time for solidarity, not stigma.
中方将继续本着公开透明和高度负责任的态度，与国际社会加强合作，维护好中国人民以及在华外国公民的生命安全与身体健康。
China will continue to enhance cooperation with the international community in an open, transparent and highly responsible manner to safeguard the life and health of Chinese people and foreign nationals in China.
问：目前有哪些国家向中方提供了防疫物资援助？能否介绍具体情况？
Which countries have provided assistance to China for outbreak response? Could you share more information?
答：请查阅刚刚给塔斯社的回答。
Please refer to the answer I gave to Tass.
问：你刚才严厉批评了美国政府对待中国疫情的所作所为。
You just severely criticized the US government response to the outbreak.
据了解，美国第二架飞机可能延期，有消息说这是因为中方还未批复美方申请，请问这是否属实？
We understand the second US flight is experiencing delay - is it due to the lack of Chinese government authorization as some say?
答：我刚才已经说了，美方已经第一个派包机接走了其在武汉的领馆官员。
As I just said, the US was the first to evacuate its consulate staff in Wuhan via charter flight.
有关包机安排需要根据武汉机场接受物资等各种情况作出统筹。
Further arrangements need to be coordinated based on a variety of factors including Wuhan airport capacity to receive supplies.
问：请问今年原定在北京举行的中欧峰会会否受到疫情影响而推迟？
Will the China-EU summit scheduled to be held in Beijing this year be affected or delayed because of the outbreak?
答：中欧之间一直保持政治外交沟通，将继续为下步重要外交议程做认真准备。
China and the EU have been in communication via political and diplomatic channels. We will continue to make meticulous preparations for the next-stage major diplomatic agenda.
问：你刚才介绍外方向中方提供援助的情况，我没有听到有美国。
You just shared with us international assistance to China.
但美方表示，美方为中方应对疫情提供了巨大帮助。
I didn't hear you mention the US.
请问美方究竟有没有向中方提供援助？
But the US side said that it had offered China tremendous help in dealing with the epidemic. Could you clarify?
答：请查阅刚刚给NBC的答复。
Please check my reply to the NBC.
问：中方是否收到巴西方面提出的从武汉撤离本国公民的要求？
Has China received any request from Brazil to pick up its citizens from Wuhan?
答：中方有能力和信心打赢这场防疫阻击战，维护中国公民以及外国在华公民的生命安全和身体健康。
China has the capacity and confidence to win this war against the epidemic and protect the life and health of the Chinese citizens and foreigners in China.
巴西是中国的友好国家，我们会照顾好巴西在华公民，请放心。
Brazil is a friend to China. Please rest assured that we will take good care of Brazilians in China.
问：从国外中国已经收到多少捐赠？这种捐赠由中国哪个机构负责收？
How much international donation has China received? Which department is in charge of accepting donations?
答：一些国家通过不同方式向中方表达对抗击疫情的支持，我们表示感谢。
Some countries have provided support and assistance to help China fight against the epidemic through various means. We are grateful for that.
外国官方和国际组织对中方的物资捐赠，由商务部负责接收。
The Ministry of Commerce is responsible for receiving donations from foreign governments and international organizations.
具体情况建议你向主管部门询问。
I would refer you to the competent authorities.
问：截至目前，中方确诊病例中有几名外国人？
As of now, how many of the confirmed cases in China are foreigners?
答：据向有关部门了解，截至2月2日，有16名在华外国人感染新型冠状病毒肺炎，其中2人已治愈出院，14人正接受隔离治疗，病情平稳。
After checking with the relevant department, as of February 2, 16 foreigners in China have been infected with the 2019 n-CoV. Among them, two have recovered and been discharged from hospital, and 14 are in quarantine and in stable conditions.
问：1月29日，巴基斯坦方面取消了此前临时采取的中巴之间航班往来的限制措施。
On January 29, Pakistan lifted restrictions on flights between Pakistan and china which were imposed temporarily.
从乌鲁木齐到伊斯兰堡的航班很快恢复了。
Following the decision one flight from Urumqi to Islamabad has been resumed.
你认为其他国家是否也会作出同样的决定？
Will other airlines also lift restrictions?
答：中巴是铁杆朋友，有互帮互助的优良传统。
China and Pakistan are iron-clad friends that share a good tradition of mutual assistance.
这次巴方坚定支持中方抗击疫情，保持航线，并在全国范围调集抗疫医疗物资支援中国，对于这份信任和信心，我们深表感谢和感动。
As China fights the outbreak, Pakistan has stood firmly with us, maintaining flights and pooling medical supplies all over the country to help China. We are deeply grateful and touched by such trust and confidence.
中方将同巴方继续密切沟通协作，维护好巴基斯坦在华公民的健康和安全。
China will continue to work in close communication and coordination with Pakistan to safeguard the health of Pakistanis in China.
外交部发言人华春莹就美方涉疫情言论答记者问
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Hua Chunying's Remarks on US Comments Regarding the Pneumonia Outbreak
问：据报道，2日，美国总统特朗普接受采访称，美方基本上关闭了来自中国的通道，我们不能让成千上万可能感染病毒的人入境。
On February 2, US President Trump said in an interview that the US has "basically shut it down coming from China"and they can't have thousands of people coming in who may have the virus.
美中关系很好，美方正向中方提供巨大帮助。
He said that the US-China relationship is very good and his administration was offering the Chinese tremendous help.
答：当前，中国政府和人民正在全力以赴抗击新型冠状病毒肺炎疫情。
At the moment, the Chinese government and people are sparing no efforts to fight the 2019-nCoV pneumonia outbreak.
我们采取了果断、有效措施，全力遏制疫情蔓延，防控工作正在逐步取得成效。
We have taken decisive and effective measures to rein in its spread, and prevention and control measures are gradually showing their effectiveness.
虽然此次新型冠状病毒肺炎感染的人数较多，但中国境内病死率非常低，仅为2.1%，远远低于埃博拉、非典（SARS）、中东呼吸综合征（MERS）等传染病。
Though the 2019-nCoV has infected a lot of people, its 2.1% mortality rate in China is far below that of infectious diseases like Ebola, SARS and MERS.
目前治愈率还在不断上升。
The number of recovered cases is also rising.
我们完全有信心、有能力打赢这场疫情阻击战。
We are fully confident and capable of winning the hard battle against this epidemic, and China's efforts have been applauded by the WHO and the international community.
中方抗击疫情努力得到世卫组织和国际社会充分肯定。
The US should react in an objective, fair, calm and evidence-based manner, rather than excessively.
美方理应采取客观公正、冷静理性态度，不作过度反应，尊重和配合中方防控努力，同中国和国际社会一道抗击新冠肺炎疫情。
It should respect and coordinate with China' prevention and control measures and join us and the international community to beat this epidemic.
中方注意到美方多次表示愿向中方提供援助，希望有关援助早日到位。
The US has said many times that it wants to help China. We would like to see early arrival of such help.
外交部发言人华春莹就美方在中方抗击疫情时发表不友善言论答记者问
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Hua Chunying's Comments to the Press on Unfriendly US Remarks Amid China's Fight Against the Outbreak
问：当前，中国正在全力抗击新型冠状病毒感染肺炎疫情，美国一些官员却不时发表对华不友善的言论。
As China makes its utmost efforts to fight the pneumonia outbreak caused by the novel coronavirus, some US officials have made comments unfriendly towards China.
美商务部长称，疫情有助于部分就业岗位流回美国。
The US Secretary of Commerce said the outbreak would help to accelerate the return of jobs to the US.
还有美方官员影射中国在应对疫情问题上与美国不合作。
Some other US officials suggested that China is not cooperating with the US.
今天，美国国务院发布公告，将对中国的旅行警告提高至同伊拉克、阿富汗一样的最高级别。
The Department of State today raised its travel advisory for China to the highest level, same as for Iraq and Afghanistan.
美国务卿甚至继续恶毒攻击中国的国家制度。
The US Secretary of State continued to maliciously attack China's governance system.
中方对此有何评论？
What's China's response?
答：当前，中国人民正在全力抗击疫情。
The Chinese people are making their best efforts to fight against the outbreak.
中国政府本着公开透明、负责任的态度及时向包括美国在内的国际社会发布信息，分享数据。
The Chinese government has released information and shared data with the US and the rest of the international community in a timely, transparent and responsible manner.
患难见真情，许多国家都以不同方式表达对中国抗击疫情的支持和帮助。
As the saying goes, a friend in need is a friend indeed. Many countries have offered China help and support through various ways.
相比之下，美方的言行既不符合事实，更不合时宜。
In contrast, the US comments and actions are neither based on facts, nor helpful at this particular time.
世界卫生组织呼吁各国避免采取旅行限制，但话音未落，美国就反其道而行之，带了一个很不好的头，实在太不厚道。
While the WHO has only just specifically advised against any travel restrictions, the US has decided to act in the opposite way. This has set a bad example. It is certainly not a gesture of goodwill.
艰难困苦，玉汝于成。
As a Chinese saying goes, "Just as polishing refines a piece of jade, adversity makes one stronger."
中华民族是厚德载物、自强不息的民族。
The Chinese nation is dedicated to social commitment and self-discipline.
我们坚信，有中国共产党的坚强领导，有中国特色社会主义制度的巨大优势，有国际社会的大力支持，伟大的中国人民团结一心，众志成城，一定能战胜疫情，一定能战胜前进道路上的一切艰难险阻，一定能实现中华民族伟大复兴。
We firmly believe that with the strong leadership of the Communist Party of China, the enormous strength of the system of socialism with Chinese characteristics, and the robust support from the international community, the great Chinese people will stand united against the challenge, and will prevail over the outbreak. We will overcome all difficulties that stand in our way. And we will realize the great renewal of the Chinese nation.
外交部发言人华春莹就世界卫生组织发布新型冠状病毒感染的肺炎疫情为“国际关注的突发公共卫生事件”答记者问
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Hua Chunying's Remarks on WHO Declaring Pneumonia Outbreak Caused by Novel Coronavirus Public Health Emergency of International Concern
问：日前，世界卫生组织总干事发布新型冠状病毒感染的肺炎疫情构成“国际关注的突发公共卫生事件”。
WHO Director-General Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus declared the pneumonia outbreak caused by the novel coronavirus a public health emergency of international concern (PHEIC).
中方对此有何看法？
What's your comment?
答：新型冠状病毒感染的肺炎疫情发生以来，中国政府一直本着对人民健康高度负责的态度，采取了最全面、最严格的防控举措，很多举措远超出《国际卫生条例》要求，我们完全有信心和能力，打赢这场疫情防控阻击战。
Since the outbreak of the novel coronavirus epidemic, the Chinese government has been taking the most comprehensive and rigorous prevention and control measures with a high sense of responsibility for people's health. Many of these measures go well beyond the requirements of the International Health Regulations. We have full confidence and capability to win this fight against the epidemic.
同时，中方本着公开透明和负责任态度向有关各方及时通报疫情信息、分享病毒基因序列。
At the same time, acting with openness, transparency and a responsible attitude, the Chinese side informed relevant sides and shared the genome sequence of the coronavirus in a timely manner.
世界卫生组织及许多国家对此予以充分肯定和高度评价。
WHO and many countries have recognized and commended this.
中国同世卫组织一直保持着密切沟通和良好合作，世卫组织专家赴武汉进行了实地考察，总干事谭德塞于日前访华，同中方就疫情防控工作充分交换了意见，对中方防控工作给予充分肯定，对中国抗击疫情为世界作出的巨大贡献表示高度赞赏。
China has been in close communication and cooperation with WHO. WHO experts recently conducted a field trip to Wuhan. Director-General Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus also visited China and discussed containment and mitigation of the 2019-nCoV with the Chinese side. He commends China's efforts and speaks highly of China's great contribution to the world by fighting against the novel coronavirus.
中方愿继续同世卫组织及各国一道，共同维护全球和地区公共卫生安全。
China will continue working with WHO and other countries to safeguard regional and global public health security.
外交部发言人华春莹就美国国会众议院通过“2019年西藏政策及支持法案”答记者问
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Hua Chunying's Remarks on the US House of Representatives Passing the Tibetan Policy and Support Act of 2019
问：据报道，美国国会众议院当地时间28日下午审议通过了“2019年西藏政策及支持法案”，中方对此有何评论？
I wonder if you could comment on the US House of Representatives passing the Tibetan Policy and Support Act of 2019 on the afternoon of January 28 local time?
答：美国国会众议院通过所谓的“2019年西藏政策及支持法案”，此举严重违反国际法和国际关系基本准则，粗暴干涉中国内政，向“藏独”势力发出严重错误信号。
The US House of Representatives passed the Tibetan Policy and Support Act of 2019. This move has severely breached international law and basic norms governing international relations, grossly interfered in China's internal affairs, and sent a wrong message to "Tibet independence" forces.
中方对此表示强烈愤慨、坚决反对。
We are indignant at and firmly opposed to it.
西藏自古以来就是中国领土。
Xizang has been part of China since ancient times.
西藏事务纯属中国内政，不容任何外部势力干涉。
Xizang affairs are purely China's internal affairs that allow no foreign interference.
过去60多年来，西藏经济社会文化生态等各领域都取得了历史性发展变化。
During the past 60 years or so, Xizang has seen historical progress in economic, social, cultural, ecological and other areas.
当前，西藏经济持续健康发展，社会大局和谐稳定，各族人民团结互助，宗教和睦佛事和顺，文化繁荣发展，生态环境良好，人民生活不断改善。
Today, it enjoys sound economic growth, social stability, ethnic solidarity, religious harmony, cultural vitality, well-preserved ecological environment and improving living-standards.
西藏各族人民衷心拥护中国政府和西藏自治区政府的各项政策，正在同全国人民一道，为全面建成小康社会而努力奋斗。
People of all ethnic groups in the Xizang Autonomous Region endorse wholeheartedly the policies of China's central government and the regional government. They are working with people of other provinces towards completing the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects.
近年来，国际社会越来越了解西藏的真实情况，也越来越理解支持中国的涉藏政策。
In recent years, the international community have also come to know Xizang better, which leads to greater understanding and support for China's Xizang-related policies.
涉藏问题不是民族问题和宗教问题，也不是人权问题，而是涉及中国主权和领土完整的重大原则问题。
Xizang-related issues are not about ethnicity, religion or human rights, but an important matter of principle concerning China's sovereignty and territorial integrity.
我们敦促美方客观看待西藏经济社会发展成就，充分认清涉藏问题的高度敏感性，立即纠正错误，停止利用涉藏问题干涉中国内政，多做有利于中美互信与合作的事，而不是相反。
We urge the US to take an objective stance when looking at Xizang's economic and social progress, grasp the highly sensitive nature of Xizang-related issues, correct its mistake and stop interfering in China's domestic affairs. It should work to enhance mutual understanding and cooperation between China and itself rather than doing the opposite.
外交部发言人华春莹就美国公布“中东和平新计划”政治部分内容答记者问
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Hua Chunying's Remarks on the Political Framework of a Middle East Peace Plan Proposed by the US
问：28日，美国总统特朗普公布了“中东和平新计划”政治部分内容，中方对此有何评论？
US President Trump announced the political framework of a new Middle East peace plan on January 28. I wonder if you could comment on that?
答：中方注意到了有关报道，正在对有关内容进行研究。
We noted media reports on that and are studying this plan.
中方一贯认为，联合国有关决议和“两国方案”、“土地换和平”原则等国际共识构成了解决巴勒斯坦问题的基础，应当得到遵守。
We believe the Palestine issue should be resolved on the basis of relevant UN resolutions, the principles of "two-state solution" and "land for peace" and other international consensus, which should all be observed. To make any plan on the Palestine issue, it is important to heed the views of parties concerned, especially the Palestinian side.
任何有关巴勒斯坦问题的解决方案，应该倾听主要当事方特别是巴勒斯坦方面的看法和主张，应该通过平等对话和谈判达成协议，应该有利于推动巴勒斯坦问题早日实现全面、公正、持久解决。
Agreements in this process should be reached through equal-footed dialogue and negotiation. Any plan on this should help resolving the issue as soon as possible in a comprehensive, fair and lasting way.
外交部发言人华春莹就伊朗外长扎里夫赞赏中方应对新型冠状病毒感染的肺炎疫情工作答记者问
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Hua Chunying's Remarks on Iranian Foreign Minister Mohammad Zarif's Appreciation for China's Response to the Pneumonia Outbreak Caused by the Novel Coronavirus
问：日前，伊朗外长扎里夫专门用中文在推特发文，赞赏中方应对新型冠状病毒感染的肺炎疫情工作。
Recently, Foreign Minister Mohammad Zarif wrote a twitter in Chinese, praising China's response to the outbreak of pneumonia caused by the novel coronavirus.
请问中方对此有何评论？
What is China's comment?
答：扎里夫外长的表态充分体现了中伊两国传统友好和真诚的伙伴关系。
Foreign Minister Zarif's remarks fully reflect the traditional friendship and sincere partnership between China and Iran.
王毅国务委员兼外长已就此向扎里夫外长转达口信，向伊方表示感谢。
State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi has conveyed an oral message to Foreign Minister Zarif to express thanks to the Iranian side.
当前，中国政府正采取坚决有力措施对疫情进行科学有效的防控，并同世界卫生组织和其他国际伙伴保持密切合作。
At present, the Chinese government is taking resolute and forceful measures to conduct scientific and effective prevention and control of the epidemic, and maintaining close cooperation with the World Health Organization and other international partners.
我们有充分信心尽快控制住并最终战胜疫情。
We are fully confident that the outbreak will be brought under control and defeated as soon as possible.
外交部发言人华春莹就美国驻武汉总领馆宣布闭馆并将撤回美方人员事答记者问
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Hua Chunying's Remarks on the Closing of the US Consulate General in Wuhan and Evacuation of Personnel
问：据了解，美国驻武汉总领馆日前宣布闭馆并将美方人员撤回美国。
As we understand, the US consulate general in Wuhan announced its plan to close the consulate and evacuate American personnel to the US.
答：武汉新型冠状病毒感染的肺炎疫情发生以来，中方及时向世界卫生组织及有关国家通报疫情信息，并保持密切沟通。
After the pneumonia outbreak caused by the novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China has notified the WHO and relevant countries about the epidemic in a timely manner and has stayed in close contact with them.
日前，美方提出希将美驻武汉总领馆人员从武汉撤回美国。
Recently the US proposed to evacuate its personnel from the consulate general in Wuhan to the US.
中方根据国际惯例，依照中方有关防疫规定，作出相应安排，提供必要协助和便利。
Following international customary practices, China makes arrangements that are consistent with our epidemic control measures and provides necessary assistance and convenience.
外交部发言人华春莹就俄罗斯总统普京倡议召开联合国安理会五常峰会答记者问
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Hua Chunying's Remarks on Russian President Vladimir Putin's Proposal to Hold a Meeting of the Heads of State of the Five Permanent Members of the UN Security Council
问：1月23日，俄罗斯总统普京在出席第五届世界大屠杀论坛时表示，俄倡议召开联合国安理会五常峰会。
On January 23, when attending the Fifth World Holocaust Forum, Russian President Vladimir Putin said that Russia proposed to hold a meeting of the heads of state of the five permanent members (P5) of the UN Security Council.
请问中方持何立场？
What is China's position?
答：联合国安理会是国际集体安全机制的核心，安理会五常任理事国对维护国际和平与安全负有特殊责任。
The UN Security Council is the core of the international collective security mechanism and the five permanent members of the Security Council bear special responsibility for maintaining international peace and security.
当前国际形势中的不稳定、不确定性显著增加，地区热点问题此起彼伏，多边主义和联合国作用面临严峻挑战。
With rising instability and uncertainty in the international landscape and emerging regional hotspot issues, multilateralism and the role of the UN face severe challenges.
今年是世界反法西斯战争胜利和联合国成立75周年，五常就国际局势和重大国际问题深入沟通，加强协调合作，对维护多边主义和战后国际秩序、维护联合国及安理会权威、维护国际和地区和平与稳定具有重要意义。
As this year marks the victory of the World Anti-Fascist War and the founding of the UN, in-depth communication and enhanced coordination and cooperation between the P5 on the international situation and major international issues are of great significance to maintaining multilateralism and the post-war international order, the authority of the UN and the Security Council, and international and regional peace and stability.
中方支持俄方关于举行安理会五常峰会的倡议，愿同俄方及其他安理会常任理事国就此保持沟通与协调。
China supports Russia's proposal to hold the P5 summit and stands ready to stay in communication and coordination with Russia and other permanent members of the Security Council.
2020年1月23日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on January 23, 2020
问：据报道，美国国务卿蓬佩奥22日访问牙买加时称，各国应对轻易从中国获取资金保持警惕。中方投资可能助长腐败，破坏法治，破坏环境，且无法为当地创造就业机会。
It's reported that US Secretary of State Pompeo said on January 22 during a visit to Jamaica that countries should be wary of easy money from China because it may feed corruption, undermine rule of law, ruin the environment and not create jobs locally.
他21日在访问哥斯达黎加时还称，中国“华而不实”的经济承诺往往会让贷款国产生债务依赖，并“侵蚀”其主权。
While in Costa Rica, he said on on January 21 that China's flashy promises have often produced debt, dependency and even the erosion of sovereignty.
中方对此有何评论？
What's your comment?
答：美方个别人对中拉关系的诋毁并不新鲜，他们说的不过是些陈词滥调。
It is hardly any news for certain people in the US to denigrate China-Latin America relations with the same old clichés.
他们一而再、再而三地去散布这些谣言，其实只能说明这些谣言在拉美地区根本就没有市场。
Time and again they tried to spread the rumors, which only shows how unpopular those rumors are in Latin America.
美方个别人的说辞潜含着对拉美国家判断力的蔑视。
Such remarks reveal an underlying contempt for Latin American countries' judgment.
长期以来，中国与拉美和加勒比国家秉持相互尊重、平等互利、合作共赢理念，聚焦共同发展，开展互利合作，符合彼此需求和利益，有力拉动了当地经济发展和民生改善，创造了大量就业岗位，给各自人民带来了实实在在的好处。
For a long time, China and Latin American and Caribbean countries have focused on common development through mutually-beneficial cooperation under the principle of mutual respect and equality. Such win-win cooperation meets the needs and serves the interests of both sides. It has given a strong boost to economic growth and improvement of livelihoods, created a great number of jobs and brought tangible benefits to the peoples.
与中国的合作到底好不好，拉美国家心中自有一杆秤。
When asked whether cooperation with China is a good thing or not, Latin American countries have a clear answer.
美方如果能为拉美国家发展经济、改善民生多做些实事，我们表示欢迎。
If the US side could take concrete actions to help Latin American countries grow their economy and improve people's welfare, we will welcome that.
我们也愿意同包括美方在内的各方在拉美开展三方合作、多方合作。
We are also open to third-party or multiple-party cooperation in Latin America with other sides including the US.
但如果美方只是耍嘴皮子，开空头支票，甚至还对中拉互利合作说三道四、挑拨离间，我们坚决反对。
However, if they are merely paying lip service and writing empty banknotes, or even criticizing or disrupting the mutually-beneficial cooperation between China and Latin American countries, we are firmly against it.
最后我要强调，拉美国家和人民完全有权利、也有能力自主选择合作伙伴，任何人不应指手画脚、横加阻挠。
I want to stress that Latin American countries and peoples have the right and ability to choose cooperation partners by themselves. Nobody should wantonly criticize their decisions or stand in the way of such cooperation.
某些人一厢情愿将拉美看作自己的“后院”，实在有些自作多情，也有些不合时宜。
Certain people see Latin America as their backyard. Such wishful thinking is indeed inappropriate and against the trend of the times.
问：据报道，针对新型冠状病毒感染的肺炎疫情，世界卫生组织（WHO）推迟就疫情是否构成突发公共卫生事件作出决定。
Regarding the pneumonia epidemic caused by the novel coronavirus (nCoV), the WHO has decided to postpone a decision on whether or not to declare a global health emergency.
中方对此有何回应？
I wonder what is the foreign ministry's response?
是否认为WHO应宣布进入紧急状态？
Is China in favor of declaring such an emergency?
答：北京时间1月22日晚，世界卫生组织以电话会议的形式，就新型冠状病毒感染的肺炎召开首次突发事件委员会会议。
On the night of January 22 Beijing time, in the form of telephone conference, the WHO convened the first Emergency Committee meeting in response to the pneumonia caused by the novel coronavirus.
会后，世界卫生组织总干事谭德塞在记者会上并没有宣布新型冠状病毒感染的肺炎疫情构成国际关注的突发公共卫生事件。
After the meeting, WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus didn't declare the nCoV a global health emergency.
据我了解，各方将就疫情的研判和防控措施的调整继续保持紧密沟通与协作。
As I know, parties concerned will stay in close communication and coordination on evaluation and possible adjustment of prevention and control measures.
突发事件委员会还计划举行第二次会议。
The committee plans to hold another meeting later.
中方将会继续本着公开、透明和对全球卫生安全高度负责的态度，及时向世卫组织、有关国家和港澳台地区通报疫情，同他们保持密切沟通。
Acting with openness, transparency and a high sense of responsibility to global health security, Chinese authorities will continue to share information of the epidemic with the WHO, relevant nations and China's Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan regions in a timely manner.
我们也相信世卫组织的突发事件委员会能够根据事实，对疫情作出科学、公正、合理的分析和判断。
We believe the WHO Emergency Committee will have fair, fact-based and reasonable evaluation and judgment on the situation.
问：昨天，中方多次发布公告称，如非特殊情况，尽量不要前往武汉。
Yesterday Chinese health authorities said in more than one statement that without special reason, it's better not to go to Wuhan.
如果外国驻华记者需要到武汉采访报道新型冠状病毒感染的肺炎疫情，中方是否允许？他们可以获得特别防护设备吗？
I wonder if foreign journalists can be allowed to go to Wuhan to cover the situation? Can they get special equipment to protect themselves?
答：我们理解外国记者对武汉近期发生的疫情十分关注。
We understand foreign journalists' special attention on the recent pneumonia outbreak in Wuhan.
昨天上午，国新办召开新闻发布会，国家卫生健康委负责人全面介绍了新型冠状病毒感染的肺炎防控工作有关情况，并回答了中外记者提问。
A chief official of the National Health Commission briefed the media and answered questions on the prevention and control measures on the pneumonia caused by the novel coronavirus at a press conference held by the State Council Information Office yesterday morning.
几天来，我在这里也多次应询介绍了相关情况。
I also answered many related questions in recent days.
我想这些对大家了解疫情信息和防控工作进展都应该有所帮助。
I hope our efforts have helped you know more about the epidemic and better understand the prevention and control work.
下一步，我们会继续本着公开、透明原则，及时发布相关信息并回应外界关切。
More updates will be coming out in an open and transparent manner.
大家可能注意到，为更好地防控疫情，1月21日，武汉市政府已经公开呼吁外地人员近期不要去武汉。
As you may have noticed, to better prevent and control the epidemic, on January 21, the Wuhan government called on people outside Wuhan not to visit the city in the near future.
今天上午，武汉市新型冠状病毒感染的肺炎疫情防控指挥部发布通告，全市城市公交、地铁、轮渡、长途客运暂停运营；无特殊原因，市民不要离开武汉，机场、火车站离汉通道暂时关闭。
This morning the Wuhan Novel Coronavirus Infected Pneumonia Prevention and Control Headquarters announced a series of measures, including suspending the operation of buses, subways, ferries and intercity buses in Wuhan, advising citizens against leaving the city if not necessary, and temporarily closing exit channels in airports and train stations.
我们希望外国记者朋友能了解当前武汉的实际情况，理解武汉方面为防控疫情采取的措施，认真听取他们的建议。
We hope foreign journalists in China can apprehend what is happening in Wuhan, understand the prevention and control measures taken and heed the advice from local authorities.
事实上，这也是为大家好。
This is for their own good.
当然，据我了解，目前已经有一些外国记者前往武汉采访。
Of course, I understand that some foreign journalists are already in Wuhan to report on the situation.
对于那些已经在武汉的外国记者朋友，请他们务必遵守当地有关规定，听从有关安排，同时做好个人的卫生安全防护，防止交叉传染。
They should listen to the suggestions from local authorities, take preventive health measures and avoid cross infection.
最后，借此机会我也要提醒所有外国记者，当然还有中国记者，最近这段时间特别要注意身体健康，做好个人卫生防护。
I advise all journalist friends to take care of themselves and take good preventive health measures.
问：据报道，近日圣多美和普林西比民主统一党/变革力量民主运动/公民发展民主联盟三党联盟公开发表声明，澄清此前台湾“外交部”网站报道该联盟成员、前总统德梅内塞斯向蔡英文当选台湾地区领导人致贺系不实报道，表示三党联盟坚定奉行一个中国原则，德梅内塞斯本人从未以任何方式进行致贺。
A statement was recently released by a coalition in Sao Tome and Principe consisting of the the Democratic Convergence Party, The Force for Democratic Change Movement and the Union of Democrats for Citizenship and Development. It clarifies that the "congratulations" from former President Fradique de Menezes to recently elected Taiwan leader Tsai Ing-wen were not true at all, a piece of fake news that was previously released by Taiwan's department for foreign affairs on its website. The statement also says that the coalition firmly sticks to the one-China principle and Mr. Fradique de Menezes has never congratulated Tsai.
中方对此有何评论？
I wonder if you could comment on that?
答：我们注意到有关声明，对圣多美和普林西比三党联盟重申坚持一个中国原则、澄清有关不实报道表示赞赏。
We noted this statement and commend this coalition in Sao Tome and Principe for reaffirming its commitment to the one-China principle and clarifying the truth.
一个中国原则是公认的国际关系基本准则和国际社会普遍共识。
The one-China principle is a basic norm governing international relations and a universal consensus of the international community.
中国和圣普复交3年多来，双边关系发展顺利，各领域的合作成果惠及两国人民，任何企图破坏中国圣普友好关系的图谋和伎俩都不会得逞。
In the past three years or so after China and San Tome and Principe resumed diplomatic ties, our bilateral relations have developed smoothly and our cooperation has benefited both peoples. The attempt to undermine our friendly relations will never succeed.
我们奉劝民进党当局不要总搞这些自欺欺人的小伎俩，这样只会被世人耻笑。
We advise the DPP authority to give up those pathetic tricks that fool only themselves and make them a laughing stock of the world.
问：今天上午，武汉市发布通告，自10点起，全市城市公交、地铁、轮渡、长途客运暂停运营；无特殊原因，市民不要离开武汉，机场、火车站离汉通道暂时关闭。
This morning the Wuhan authorities announced a series of measures that came into effect at 10am, including suspending the operation of buses, subways, ferries and intercity buses in Wuhan, advising citizens against leaving the city if not necessary, and temporarily closing exit channels in airports and train stations.
目前，仍有很多外国公民在武汉。
There are many foreigners already staying in Wuhan.
该通告对他们应该也是适用的。
The restrictions are on them also.
中方是否会在特殊情况下考虑他们回国的需求？比如，经过检测证明他们是健康的，没有传播疾病的风险。
Will the Chinese government consider any requests from them to return to their countries as special reasons? For example, after proper screening that shows they are healthy and free from any chance to spread it further?
答：关于你提到的具体问题，建议你向有关地方政府了解。
I would refer you to local authorities for these specific questions.
这里我可以作一个原则回应：中方一贯依法保障外国公民在华的正当、合法权益。
As a principled response, China guarantees the legitimate rights and interests of foreign citizens in our country.
问：武汉市今天上午发布通告，机场、火车站离汉通道暂时关闭。
Authorities in Wuhan announced this morning to temporarily close airports and train stations.
外国公民是否也一样不能出城？
Are foreign citizens not allowed to leave the city either?
答：你和刚才这位记者问的是同样的问题。
Your question is the same as the previous one.
建议你向有关地方政府了解询问。
I'd still refer you to local authorities.
我能告诉你的是，作为原则，中方一贯依法保障外国公民在华的正当、合法权益。
As a principled response, China guarantees the legitimate and legal rights and interests of foreign citizens in our country.
问：据报道，金融特别行动工作组有关会议正在北京举行。会议审议了巴基斯坦行动计划进展报告。
A Financial Action Task Force (FATF) meeting was held in Beijing this week that reviewed Pakistan national action plan report.
中方如何评价巴基斯坦相关领域工作取得的进展？
How does China see Pakistan's progress?
答：确实，金融特别行动工作组国际合作审查工作组亚太联合小组会议目前正在北京举行。
Indeed, the Asia-Pacific Joint Group of the FATF International Cooperation Review Group is holding a meeting in Beijing.
据我了解，会议还在进行当中。
I'm not aware of the details in the meeting as it is still ongoing.
会议讨论的具体情况我目前还不了解。
Here is a principled response.
这里我想作一个原则回应：金融特别行动工作组是就反洗钱、打击恐怖融资活动开展国际合作的重要平台。
The FATF is an important platform for international cooperation in countering money-laundering and terrorist financing.
它的宗旨和目标是帮助各国更好地打击洗钱、恐怖融资等非法活动，防止国际金融体系遭到滥用。
The purpose and goal of FATF is to help countries better fight illicit activities including money-laundering and terrorist financing and to prevent the international financial system from being abused.
巴基斯坦全力加强国内反恐怖融资体系，取得了显著进展。
Pakistan has made all-out efforts to strengthen domestic CFT regime with visible progress.
巴方展现的政治意愿和积极努力，应当得到国际社会的认可和鼓励。
Its political will and active efforts should be recognized and encouraged by the international community.
我们希望金融特别行动工作组为巴基斯坦继续改进并完善反恐怖融资体系、有效打击恐怖融资提供建设性的支持和帮助。
We hope FATF will offer Pakistan constructive support and assistance in its continued efforts to improve its counter-terrorism financing system and effectively fight terrorist financing.
中方作为金融特别行动工作组主席和亚太联合小组共同主席，将继续秉持客观公正和建设性的态度参与相关会议的讨论。
As the president of FATF and co-chair of the Asia-Pacific Joint Group, China will continue to uphold an impartial and constructive attitude in relevant discussions.
问：我刚刚看到一则消息，一名居住在武汉的60多岁的日本男性感染了新型冠状病毒肺炎。
I just saw the news that a Japanese man in his 60s in Wuhan was diagnosed with pneumonia caused by the new coronavirus.
你能否证实？这是否是中国国内确诊的首例外国公民感染病例？
Could you confirm this? Is this the first confirmed case of a foreign citizen in China?
答：我还没看到这个消息。
I haven't seen the news.
你是从哪儿看到的？
What's your source?
记者：是一家日本媒体报道的。
Journalist: It's a Japanese media report.
报道说还没确诊，但已经有疑似症状。
It says the case is yet to be confirmed, but the patient has shown symptoms suspected to be caused by the new coronavirus.
答：我不了解你说的情况，可以帮你向主管部门询问，你也可以直接向他们询问。
I'm not aware of the case. I will try and get information from the competent authorities. You may also ask them directly.
关于中国已经确诊的病例中是否有外国公民，建议你也要向主管部门去询问。
As to whether there are confirmed cases of foreign citizens, I would also refer you to competent authorities.
根据2020年春节假期放假安排，外交部例行记者会将从明天到1月30日休会，31日恢复正常。
To celebrate the Spring Festival (the Chinese New Year), our press conference will be in recess from tomorrow to January 30 and resumed on 31.
休会期间，外交部发言人办公室将会通过电话、传真、邮件、微信等方式接受中外记者的提问。
During the recess, you may still reach the MFA Spokesperson's Office via telephone, fax, email and WeChat.
明天就是农历除夕，很荣幸我已经连续第三年主持春节前的最后一场外交部例行记者会。
Tomorrow will be the lunar new year's eve. It's a great pleasure for me to hold the year-end press conference for the third year.
按老规矩，在这里向大家表示衷心感谢，并致以新春问候。
As usual, I would like to express heartfelt appreciation and festival greetings to all of you.
祝大家鼠年大吉，给大家拜年！
I wish you an auspicious new year in the Year of the Mouse.
2019年，我们满怀骄傲地庆祝了中华人民共和国成立70周年，新中国70年来取得的伟大成就得到了国际社会的普遍赞誉。
In 2019, we proudly celebrated the 70th anniversary of the founding of the PRC. The great achievements China made in the past seven decades have won high praise from the international community.
2020年，我们将实现脱贫攻坚目标，全面建成小康社会，为人类发展进步事业作出更大贡献。
In 2020, we will meet the target of poverty eradication, complete the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects, and contribute even more to human development and progress.
我和我的同事们愿同中外记者朋友一道，去讲述、去记录、去呈现这一伟大的历史进程。
My colleagues and I will work together with all journalist friends to tell and present this great historical process.
祝大家春节快乐！大家出门不要忘了戴口罩。
Happy Spring Festival to you all! Don't forget to wear masks when you go out.
2020年1月22日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on January 22, 2020
问：据报道，原外交部阿富汗事务特使邓锡军近日已赴任中国驻东盟大使。
Deng Xijun, former Chinese Foreign Ministry's Special Envoy on Afghan Affairs, is now working as the Chinese ambassador to ASEAN.
请问中方是否会任命新的阿富汗事务特使？
I wonder if there's going to be a new Chinese special envoy on Afghan affairs?
答：中方一直积极参与和推动阿富汗和平和解进程，高度重视与相关各方的沟通协调和涉阿国际合作。
China has been actively participating in and advancing the Afghan peace and reconciliation process. We highly value communication, coordination and Afghanistan-related international cooperation with all relevant parties.
原外交部阿富汗事务特使邓锡军在任期间，为推动阿富汗问题政治解决作出了积极贡献，日前已履新任中国驻东盟大使。
Mr. Deng Xijun made contributions to helping realize political settlement of the Afghan issue while he was our ministry's special envoy. Now he is fulfilling his mission as the ambassador to ASEAN.
中方已任命刘健先生为新任中国外交部阿富汗事务特使。
Mr. Liu Jian is designated as the new Chinese special envoy on Afghan affairs.
刘特使是资深外交官，曾先后担任中国驻阿富汗、马来西亚、巴基斯坦等国大使，经验丰富，熟悉阿富汗事务。
He is a veteran diplomat who has rich knowledge in Afghan affairs and worked in Afghanistan, Malaysia and Pakistan as the Chinese ambassador.
中方将继续为阿富汗早日实现和平稳定发挥建设性作用。
China will continue to make constructive efforts in realizing peace and stability in Afghanistan at an early date.
问：新型冠状病毒感染的肺炎疫情发生后，你是否认为将台湾排除在世卫组织之外会影响台湾应对当前疫情？
Do you think Taiwan's exclusion from the WHO in the current situation in any way impairs its ability to respond to the coronavirus outbreak?
台方呼吁世界卫生组织允许台湾参与世卫组织相关活动。
Taiwan has called for the WHO to allow space for Taiwan's participation.
中方对此有何评论？
I wonder if you have any response to that?
答：没有人比中国中央政府更关心台湾同胞的健康福祉。
No one cares more about the health and wellbeing of our compatriots in Taiwan than China's central government does.
武汉发生新型冠状病毒感染的肺炎疫情后，国家卫生健康委及时主动向台湾地区通报疫情信息。
After the pneumonia outbreak caused by the novel coronavirus took place in Wuhan, the National Health Commission notified the Taiwan region in a timely and prompt manner.
1月13日至14日，应台湾地区相关部门请求，台湾地区专家到武汉进行了实地考察，对疫情防控、应对处置、医疗诊治、病原检测等问题进行了全面考察，并同参与此次疫情防控和患者治疗的大陆专家进行了交流。
From January 13 to 14, as requested by relevant authorities in Taiwan, experts from the Taiwan region went to Wuhan to see our work on prevention and control, medical treatment and pathogen detection. They also had discussions with experts in the mainland who participated in related medical work.
台方医疗专家对大陆方面的接待表达由衷感谢。
The Taiwan experts expressed heartfelt appreciation for their reception in the mainland.
至于台湾参与国际组织活动问题，我们多次强调过，必须在一个中国原则下，通过两岸协商作出合情合理安排。
As we repeatedly stressed, Taiwan's participation in international organization activities must be arranged in a fair and reasonable manner following the one-China principle after cross-strait consultations.
根据中方同世卫组织达成的安排，台湾地区的医疗卫生专家可以参加世卫组织相关技术会议，有需要时世卫组织专家可赴台湾地区进行考察或提供援助。
Based on the arrangement made by China and the WHO, medical experts from the Taiwan region can attend relevant technical meetings at the WHO, and the WHO can send experts to Taiwan to inspect or assist when necessary.
台湾地区能够及时获取世卫组织发布的全球突发公共卫生事件信息，台湾地区发生的突发公共卫生事件信息也能够及时向世卫组织通报。
The Taiwan region has timely access to WHO's information on global public health emergencies, and any emergency happening in the Taiwan region can be reported to the WHO in time.
这些安排都确保了无论是岛内还是国际上发生突发公共卫生事件，台湾地区均可及时有效应对。
Those arrangements ensure that the Taiwan region can handle public health emergencies in a timely and effective manner regardless of where they may take place.
问：21日，《金融时报》刊发一篇文章，称美国曾是全球首屈一指的创新大国，但中国已迅速赶超美龙头地位，知识产权保护力度也在不断加大。
The Financial Times carried an article, saying that the US was once the one and only superpower of innovation around the world. But China is quickly catching up and has greatly enhanced its IPR protection.
中国日益成为创新之国。
China has gradually become a major power of innovation.
答：你应该知道，我们一般不对媒体、智库、专家、学者的报道或评论作出具体回应。
I believe you understand that we usually don't comment on the ideas and reports of the media, thinktanks, experts and scholars.
但这里我愿意和你分享一些数据。
But here's some statistics on hand that I'd like to share with you.
当前，中国研发投入居世界第二，发明专利申请量居世界第一，有效发明专利保有量居世界第三。
Currently China ranks the world second in research and development (R&D) spending, the first in patent application filings, and the third in the number of valid patent holdings.
根据世界知识产权组织发布的《全球创新指数2019》报告，中国整体排名位列全球第14位，连续四年上升。
According to the 2019 edition of the Global Innovation Index (GII) report, China ranked the 14th worldwide, climbing up the ladder for four years in a row.
根据世界银行《全球营商环境报告2020》，中国的营商环境从2017年的第78位上升到2019年的第31位。
The Global Business Report 2020 issued by the World Bank raised China's business environment from the 78th place in 2017 to the 31st in 2019.
世界知识产权组织现任总干事高锐也多次对中国知识产权事业的进步予以积极评价。
More than once, Director General of WIPO Francis Gurry spoke highly of the achievements China has made in IPR protection.
这些都是中国知识产权近年来不断发展的有力证明，任何不带偏见的人都应对中国知识产权事业发展作出客观评价。
These are all strong proof that China has been making steady progress in its IPR protection, a conclusion that anyone without bias will be able to arrive at.
当然，中国还是个发展中国家，我们的知识产权保护还有不完善的地方。
That said, China is still a developing country and there is still room for improvement in IPR protection.
中国致力于对国内外企业的知识产权一视同仁、同等保护，正不断采取有力措施，加大知识产权执法和保护力度。
China is committed to according domestic and foreign IPRs equal treatment and equal protection, and we are taking effective measures to strengthen IPR law enforcement and protection.
去年一年来，我们出台了多项加强知识产权保护的政策举措。
Many policies and measures were rolled out last year to strengthen IPR protection.
去年4月，中国全国人大常委会通过了关于修改《中华人民共和国商标法》的决定，其中将恶意侵犯商标专用权的赔偿数额进行了调整，大幅提高了侵权违法成本。
The NPC Standing Committee adopted a decision to amend the Patent Law last April, adjusting penalties on malicious infringement on trademarks to significantly increase the cost of violation.
去年11月，我们发布了《关于强化知识产权保护的意见》，强调要着眼于统筹推进知识产权保护，提升保护整体水平。
Last November, we published the opinions on strengthening IPR protection that focuses on coordinating efforts to better protect IPRs.
目前，中国已经加入了几乎所有主要的知识产权国际条约。我这里有一个消息要提供给大家。中国目前正在积极推进加入《工业品外观设计国际注册海牙协定》的相关工作。
China has joined almost every major international treaty on IPRs. Here I have an announcement: China is seeking accession to the Hague Agreement Concerning the International Registration of Industrial Design.
中方有关部门已经启动了加入海牙协定的国内相关法律手续，争取尽早完成相关准备工作。
Relevant departments have initiated domestic legal procedures and will strive to finish them as soon as possible.
中国是全世界工业品外观设计申请量最大的国家，相信加入《海牙协定》将有助于推动中国创意、中国设计和中国制造更好地走出国门、走向世界。
China has the world's largest filings of industrial designs. We believe more Chinese innovative ideas, designs and products will go global after joining the Hague Agreement.
最后，我想指出，作为全球创新大国和知识产权大国，中国将继续长期致力于提升知识产权创造、运用、保护、管理和服务能力。
I want to stress that as a major country of innovation and IPR protection, China will continue to improve its IPR creation, application, protection, management and services.
问：据报道，哈萨克斯坦一家法院决定不将此前从新疆非法入境的2名中国人遣返回国。
A court in Kazakhstan has decided not to deport two Chinese citizens who got there after illegally crossing the border from Xinjiang.
外交部对此有何评论？
Does the foreign ministry have any response to this court ruling?
答：中方反对非法越境活动，这种犯罪活动干扰了中哈之间正常出入境秩序和人员往来。
China opposes illegal border crossing which undermines the normal order of border entry and exit as well as exchange of visits between China and Kazakhstan.
中哈双方一直就有关问题保持着沟通协调。
The two sides are staying in communication on this issue.
问：俄罗斯新一届政府昨天成立，多名部长被替换。
The new Russian government was appointed yesterday. Many ministers were replaced.
中俄之间有很多合作机制和政府间委员会，有些委员会的俄方代表已经不在内阁任职了。
China and Russia have many cooperation mechanisms and inter-government commissions. Some representatives of the Russian side who co-chaired these commissions are not in the government any more.
这种调整是否会影响中俄之间的合作和交流?
In your opinion, will this latest reshuffle affect cooperation or exchanges between China and Russia?
答：当然不会。
Of course not.
我这两天已经多次回答过类似的问题。
I answered several similar questions recently.
在习近平主席和普京总统的战略引领之下，中俄全面战略协作伙伴关系已经迈入新时代，正处于历史的最好时期。
Under the strategic leadership of President Xi Jinping and President Putin, China-Russia relations have stepped into a new era and reached its best in history.
俄方刚刚对外宣布新一届政府的组成，中方会及时与俄方新一届政府有关领导人和部门负责人做好对接，继续把两国之间有关合作机制安排好、落实好。
Russia recently announced the formation of its new government. We will work with the new government to ensure a smooth transition and continue to implement bilateral mechanisms and arrangements.
中方会继续同俄方一道，把两国全面战略协作伙伴关系不断推向新的高度，这符合两国利益，对地区以及全球的和平稳定和发展繁荣也极为重要。
China and Russia will work for new progress in our comprehensive strategic partnership of coordination. It will serve our interests and make important contributions to peace, stability and prosperity of the region and beyond.
问：据报道，美方呼吁中方参与美俄中三方核军控谈判，称中方不断扩大的核武库构成严重威胁。
The US has called on China to join the trilateral nuclear arms talks with itself and Russia, describing China's growing nuclear arsenal as a serious threat.
中方对此有何评论？
What is the foreign ministry's response to this?
答：关于你提到的这个问题，中方已经多次阐明了有关立场。中方无意参加所谓的“中美俄三边军控谈判”，这一立场非常明确。
As I've repeatedly stated, China has no intention of participating in any trilateral arms control talks with the US and Russia.
需要指出的是，中方立场得到了包括俄罗斯在内的国际社会广泛理解，美方对此是非常清楚的。
This position is very clear and has been widely understood by the international community including Russia.
美方在这个问题上不断拿中国说事，借此逃避和转嫁自己的核裁军责任，中方对此表示坚决反对。
The US constantly makes an issue of China on this to dodge and shift its responsibilities for nuclear disarmament. China is firmly opposed to that.
我想强调，国际社会普遍认为，作为世界上拥有最大和最先进核武库的国家，美国应切实履行其核裁军特殊责任，回应俄罗斯有关延长新《削减进攻性战略武器条约》的呼吁，并进一步削减其庞大的核武库，为其他核武器国家加入多边核裁军谈判创造条件。
I want to stress that it is the international community's shared view that as the US owns the largest and most advanced nuclear arsenal, it should fulfill its special responsibilities for nuclear disarmament, respond to Russia's call to extend the New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty, further reduce its large nuclear arsenal and create conditions for other nuclear states to join multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations.
中方希望美方顺应国际社会的期待，立即停止不断毁约退群、破坏全球战略稳定的消极举措，切实维护多边主义和多边裁军机制，维护基于国际法的国际秩序，维护现有军控与防扩散法律体系的权威性和有效性。
We hope the US will live up to international expectations and immediately stop making negative moves that undermine global strategic stability such as withdrawing from international treaties and agreements. It should uphold multilateralism and the multilateral disarmament mechanism, safeguard international order based on international law, and defend the authority and effectiveness of the existing legal system of international arms control and non-proliferation regime.
中方一贯致力于维护国际军控与防扩散体系，致力于推进国际军控和裁军进程，致力于维护全球战略平衡与稳定。
China is committed to upholding the international arms control and non-proliferation regime, advancing international arms control and disarmament process and safeguarding global strategic balance and stability.
我们愿与各方一道继续在裁军谈判会议、五核国机制等框架内加强沟通与协作，就事关全球战略稳定的广泛议题进行讨论，为维护国际和平安全作出积极贡献。
China stands ready to work with all parties to strengthen communication and coordination within the framework of the Conference on Disarmament and the mechanism of five nuclear-weapon states, discuss a wide range of issues concerning global strategic stability, and make contributions to international peace and security.
问：鉴于国外新型冠状病毒感染的肺炎患者数量不断增加，中方是否会采取旅行限制措施？
I wonder if you have an update on whether or not China will impose travel restrictions given the increasing number of foreign countries reporting cases of pneumonia caused by the new coronavirus?
答：今天上午，国新办举行了新闻发布会，国家卫生健康委负责人全面介绍了新型冠状病毒感染的肺炎防控工作有关情况，并回答了中外记者提问。
At this morning's press conference at the State Council Information Office, officials from the National Health Commission gave a thorough account of prevention and control measures concerning the pneumonia outbreak caused by the new coronavirus and answered questions from the press.
相关情况已经介绍得很充分，目前我没有进一步的信息可以提供。
I have nothing further to update you at the moment.
我只想强调，中方有关部门始终本着公开、透明以及对全球卫生安全高度负责的态度，及时向世卫组织、有关国家以及港澳台地区通报疫情信息。
I'd like to stress that acting with openness, transparency and a high sense of responsibility towards global health security, Chinese authorities shared information of the epidemic with the WHO, relevant nations and China's Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan regions in a timely manner.
中方将在进一步加强疫情防控工作的同时，继续深化国际合作，与国际社会携手应对疫情，共同维护地区和全球的卫生安全。
While stepping up efforts to contain the outbreak, we will deepen international cooperation and work together with the international community to deal with the epidemic and safeguard regional and global health security.
2020年1月21日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on January 21, 2020
问：据报道，世界卫生组织（WHO）宣布将就新型冠状病毒肺炎疫情召开会议，中方是否会派代表参加？将派谁出席？
The WHO said they are holding an emergency meeting about the coronavirus outbreak. We want to know if China's sending representatives, and if so, who?
答：新型冠状病毒感染的肺炎疫情发生后，中国政府高度重视，对疫情防控工作进行了全面部署。
After the outbreak of pneumonia caused by the novel coronavirus, the Chinese government has attached high importance and made comprehensive deployment on prevention and control.
同时，本着公开、透明以及对全球卫生安全高度负责的态度，中方有关部门及时向世卫组织、有关国家以及港澳台地区通报了疫情信息，第一时间分享了新型冠状病毒基因序列的信息。
Acting with openness, transparency and a high sense of responsibility towards global health security, Chinese authorities shared information of the epidemic with the WHO, relevant nations and China's Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan regions in a timely manner, including the genome sequence of the new coronavirus.
据我了解，北京时间1月22号晚上，中方将应世卫组织邀请，与其他受疫情影响的国家一道，参加《国际卫生条例》突发事件委员会会议。
As far as I know, upon invitation from the WHO, China will join other affected countries at an International Health Regulations (IHR) Emergency Committee meeting on the night of January 22 Beijing time.
与会各国、世卫组织以及有关专家将在会上分享疫情信息，并对疫情进行科学研判。
Relevant countries, the WHO and experts will share information and come up with a science-based evaluation at the meeting.
中方愿继续深化国际合作，与国际社会携手应对疫情，共同维护地区和全球的卫生安全。
China will continue to deepen international cooperation and work in concert with the international community to deal with the epidemic and safeguard regional and global health security.
问：鉴于现在已确认新型冠状病毒可以通过人际传播，中方是否会对离开武汉的人员加强防控？
Given that now there there's confirmed human-to-human transmission of the coronavirus, is China stepping up prevention or control in outbound Chinese travelers from Wuhan?
答：昨天我已经介绍过了，武汉地方政府已经采取了出境离汉人员的管控措施。
Like I said yesterday, the Wuhan government has taken measures to control the flow of people leaving the city.
我今天看到的最新消息是，武汉地方政府已经对出入武汉的人员加强了管控。
The latest news is that they have stepped up control over the flow of people leaving or entering Wuhan.
具体情况建议你向有关部门和地方政府了解询问。
I'd refer you to the competent and local authorities for more details.
这里我想再次强调，中方有关部门本着高度负责的态度，及时向世卫组织、有关国家和港澳台地区通报疫情信息。
I'd like to stress again that Chinese authorities, acting with a high sense of responsibility, shared information of the epidemic with the WHO, relevant nations and China's Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan regions in a timely manner.
在接到有关国家相关病例的通报后，中方高度重视，通过双、多边渠道与各方保持密切沟通，加强合作，全力应对。
After receiving notification of cases from relevant countries, China has taken it seriously and stayed in close communication with all parties through bilateral and multilateral channels, while strengthening cooperation with all-out efforts to deal with them.
我们愿与各方一道携手应对疫情，共同维护地区和全球的卫生安全。
We will work with all parties to jointly tackle the epidemic and safeguard regional and global health security.
问：昨天，国际货币基金组织发布了《全球经济展望》报告。报告指出，由于地缘政治紧张、社会动荡、经贸摩擦等因素，世界经济下行风险依然突出。
Yesterday, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) issued its latest World Economic Outlook report, citing greater economic downward risks due to rising geopolitical tensions, intensifying social unrest and trade frictions.
报告将今明两年全球经济增长预期分别下调至3.3%和3.4%，但将中国今年经济增长预期上调至6%。
The report trimmed its 2020 and 2021 global growth forecasts to 3.3 percent and 3.4 percent respectively, but upgraded China's 2020 growth forecast to 6.0 percent.
答：我们看到了有关报告。
We noted that report.
当前，国际形势错综复杂，不稳定不确定因素明显增多。
The international landscape is complicated with a marked increase of instability and uncertainty.
自2019年以来，IMF多次下调全球经济增长预期，新年伊始又再次下调全球经济增长预期，这表明世界经济下行压力依然没有得到缓解。
Since 2019, the IMF downgraded global economic forecasts several times. Doing so again at the beginning of a new year demonstrates persisting downward pressure.
在此背景下，中国经济运行继续保持总体平稳、稳中有进的良好发展势头。
Against such a backdrop, the Chinese economy has registered steady growth on the whole.
根据最新数据，2019年中国GDP同比增长6.1%，在世界主要经济体中名列前茅，人均GDP突破1万美元大关。
According to the latest statistics, in 2019, China's year-on-year GDP growth stood at 6.1 percent, leading major world economies. Its GDP per capita crossed the threshold of 10,000 US dollars.
中国GDP占世界的比重预计将超过16%，中国经济增长对世界经济增长的贡献率预计将达到30%左右。
China's GDP is expected to account for more than 16 percent of the world's total and its economic growth is estimated to contribute around 30 percent to world growth.
此次IMF上调中国经济增长预期，再次表明国际社会对中国经济表现的认可和对中国经济前景的信心。
IMF upgrading China's growth forecast indicates again international recognition of China's economic performance and confidence in China's economic prospects.
我要强调，尽管国内外风险挑战增多，但中国经济发展长期向好的基本面没有变，中国经济的内生动力、强大韧性和巨大潜力也没有变。
Despite mounting risks and challenges at home and abroad, China's good economic fundamentals for long-term growth remain. It still boasts solid internal growth momentum, great resilience and enormous economic potential.
今年，我们将继续坚持以供给侧结构性改革为主线，积极推动各项政策措施落地见效，确保中国经济保持中高速增长、迈向中高端水平。
In 2020, we will continue to focus on supply-side structural reform and implement set policies and measures to sustain medium-high growth and move to a medium-high level of development.
最后我还要指出，作为世界经济发展动力最足的火车头，中国不仅会把自己的事办好，而且会继续对世界经济增长作出积极贡献。
I'd like to point out that as a powerful engine of world economic growth, the stable growth of China's economy also contributes to the world economy.
在当前单边主义、保护主义抬头的形势下，中方将继续深化改革、扩大开放，坚持多边主义和自由贸易，同各方一道构建开放型世界经济，完善全球经济治理体系，推动世界经济实现强劲、平衡、可持续和包容发展。
Amid rising unilateralism and protectionism, China will continue to deepen reform, expand opening-up, uphold multilateralism and free trade, and work with other parties to foster an open world economy and improve global economic governance for strong, balanced, sustainable and inclusive development of the world economy.
问：鉴于过去24个小时公布的疫情最新信息，中方是否会在机场及其他出境场所采取更多检查措施，以减少疫情扩散风险？你说中方对出入武汉的人员加强管控，中方对准备去武汉过春节的人有什么建议？
In light of the recent developments over the past 24 hours, will China be enforcing any more checks at airports or any other places where people would be leaving China for destinations in foreign countries in order to reduce risk of spreading this virus? You talked about restrictions on people entering and leaving Wuhan, what kind of advice is China giving to people thinking about going to Wuhan for the Chinese New Year?
答：这些问题你更应该向中方主管部门和有关地方政府询问。
I'll leave these questions to the competent authorities.
我这里能告诉你的是，为了应对新型冠状病毒感染的肺炎疫情，中方制定了严密的防控方案，作了全面部署，我们将坚决遏制疫情蔓延的势头。
What I can tell you is that we have formulated comprehensive, strict prevention and control schemes in response to the pneumonia outbreak caused by the novel coronavirus. We are determined to curb any momentum of spreading.
刚才我说过，中方有关部门本着高度负责的态度，与世卫组织、有关国家和港澳台地区保持着密切沟通，向他们通报疫情信息。
Like I said earlier, Chinese authorities, acting with a high sense of responsibility, shared information of the epidemic with the WHO, relevant nations and China's Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan regions in a timely manner.
问：你是说所有在武汉的人都被禁止离开武汉吗？
Just a clarification of what you said about Wuhan. Is it that the entire population of the city are banned from leaving the city?
答：我刚才说的是，目前，武汉地方政府已经对出入武汉的人员加强了管控。
What I said is that the Wuhan government has enhanced control over the flow of people leaving or entering the city.
我理解，是在他们离开和进入武汉的时候进行一些检查，不是全面禁止出入。
My understanding is that the travelers will need to be examined instead of being banned from leaving or entering the city.
具体情况，还是建议你向地方政府去询问。
I'd refer you to the local government for more details.
中国农历新年即将到来。春节期间，国内很多同胞都会选择出国旅游。
With the Chinese New Year just days away, I believe many people have already had their overseas travels planned out.
一段时间以来，海外涉及中国游客的安全事件多发，在此我们提醒即将出国旅游的同胞们，认真了解出入境规定，妥善安排旅游行程，慎重选择旅游项目，切实提高风险防范意识。
As we have seen cases where the safety of Chinese tourists has come under threat, here are some travel advisories for those who plan to travel overseas. Know the border entry and exit regulations. Make informed choices on your travel itinerary and activities. Be aware of potential risks and take due precautions.
我们特别倡导大家文明出游，在国外期间遵守当地法律法规，尊重当地文化传统、风俗习惯和宗教信仰，爱护环境、理性维权，展现中国游客的良好形象。
In particular, we advocate traveling with good etiquette. While you are abroad, please comply with local laws and regulations, respect local culture, traditions, customs and religions, and be environmental-friendly. Seek redress rationally if your rights are violated. Remember, when you are traveling overseas, you are the image of China.
中国游客在国外如遇到紧急情况，请立即在当地报警，也可拨打外交部12308热线或通过“外交部12308”APP一键呼叫，寻求领事保护与协助。
If you find yourself in an emergency, call the local police immediately. You may also dial the MFA 12308 hotline or contact us via the "Foreign Ministry 12308" smartphone app for consular protection and assistance.
外交部和中国驻外使领馆将继续竭诚为中国公民海外出行创造条件与便利，提供支持与帮助。
The Chinese Foreign Ministry and our diplomatic missions overseas will do our utmost to facilitate Chinese citizens' travels overseas and offer support and assistance when necessary.
“无论走到哪里，祖国在你身后。”
"Wherever you go, we've got your back."
2020年1月20日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on January 20, 2020
问：中国采取了哪些举措应对新型冠状病毒肺炎疫情？是否及如何与其他国家就此开展合作？
Can you share with us any new details on how China is coordinating with other countries to prevent the spread of the new coronavirus?
答：你应该注意到了，中方的卫生健康部门已经发布了关于新型冠状病毒感染的肺炎疫情防控工作的有关信息，建议你查阅。
You may have noted that the Chinese health authorities have released relevant information on the prevention and control of pneumonia outbreak caused by the new coronavirus. You may refer to that.
这里我想强调的是，疫情发生以来，中方本着严肃认真专业的态度予以积极处置，制定严密的防控方案，全力救治患者，做好密切接触者管理，深入开展流行病学调查，对外及时发布疫情防治有关信息，并积极开展防病知识宣传。
Here I want to stress that since the outbreak, China has taken proactive measures to handle it in a serious and professional manner. We have worked to formulate strict prevention and control schemes, spared no effort to treat the patients, properly managed close contacts, carried out in-depth epidemiological investigations, released the information on epidemic prevention and control in a timely manner, and launched campaigns to raise awareness of the disease.
与此同时，中方本着负责任的态度，及时向世界卫生组织、有关国家和地区组织以及港澳台地区通报疫情信息并保持密切沟通。
At the same time, China has informed the World Health Organization, relevant nations, regional organizations, and its Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan regions of the outbreak in a timely manner and maintained close communication with them.
我们第一时间向世卫组织分享了新型冠状病毒基因序列信息。
We have shared with the WHO the information on the genome sequence of the new coronavirus as soon as possible.
在接到有关国家相关病例的通报后，中方高度重视，通过双、多边渠道与各方保持密切沟通，加强合作，全力应对。
After receiving notification of cases from relevant countries, China has taken that seriously and stayed in close communication with all parties through bilateral and multilateral channels, while strengthening cooperation with all-out efforts to deal with them.
如果其他国家也发现相关疑似输入型病例，我们欢迎第一时间通过官方渠道向中方通报情况，促进联防联控。
We hope other countries can immediately inform the Chinese side of suspected imported cases through official channels with a view to better prevention and control.
我们将同各方一道携手应对疫情，共同维护地区和全球的卫生安全。
We will work with all parties to jointly tackle the epidemic and safeguard regional and global health security.
问：据报道，近日，日本、泰国、韩国都出现了新型冠状病毒感染病例。
Recently, Japan, Thailand and the ROK all reported cases of the infection by new coronavirus.
目前正值中国春运高峰期，很多人对此表示担忧。
It is the peak season for the Spring Festival travel rush in China, and many people are concerned about it.
为了防止疫情在全世界范围扩散，中方将采取哪些措施？
What measures will China take to prevent the outbreak from spreading around the world?
答：据我们向有关部门了解，目前，日本、泰国、韩国已经向中方通报了新型冠状病毒感染确诊病例的情况。
According to what I learned from relevant authorities, Japan, Thailand and the ROK have informed China of confirmed cases of new coronavirus infections.
中方与这些国家保持着密切沟通合作，共同做好病员的救治及疫情防控工作。
China has maintained close communication and cooperation with these countries on treatment, prevention and control.
至于你提到中方将采取哪些措施防止疫情扩散，我可以告诉你的是，目前武汉地方政府已经采取了出境离汉人员管控措施，具体情况建议你向主管部门和有关地方政府了解。
As for what measures China will take to prevent the spread of the epidemic, I can tell you that the Wuhan government has taken measures to control the flow of people leaving the city. I would refer you to competent authorities and relevant local governments for more details.
我要再次强调，武汉新型冠状病毒感染的肺炎疫情发生后，中方有关部门及时向世界卫生组织、有关国家和地区组织以及港澳台地区通报了疫情信息，也一直与他们保持着密切沟通。
I would like to emphasize once again that after the outbreak of the new coronavirus-caused pneumonia in Wuhan, relevant Chinese authorities have informed the WHO, relevant nations, regional organizations, as well as China's Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan regions in a timely manner and stayed in close communication with them.
与此同时，中方有关部门也及时就疫情发展对外披露信息、介绍情况。
At the same time, relevant departments of the Chinese side have also disclosed information and briefed the public on the developments of the epidemic in a timely manner.
问：据报道，上周，俄罗斯代外长拉夫罗夫建议伊核问题全面协议签署方举行政治总司长会讨论协议前景。
Russian acting Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov suggested to hold a meeting on the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) nuclear deal at the level of political directors of the deal's remaining participants' in order to understand the future fate of the agreement.
中方认为目前是否有必要举行这一会议？是否会派员出席？
In China's point of view, is there a need to organize this meeting now? Will China attend it?
答：伊核问题全面协议是业经联合国安理会核可的多边外交重要成果，是国际核不扩散体系和中东地区和平稳定的重要支撑，是以国际法为基础的国际秩序的重要组成部分，理应得到维护和执行。
The JCPOA, endorsed by the UN Security Council, is an important outcome of multilateral diplomacy, an important pillar for the international non-proliferation regime and peace and stability in the Middle East, and a significant part of the international order based on international law. It should be upheld and implemented.
当前形势下，我们呼吁各方均保持冷静克制，坚持在全面协议联委会框架内，通过对话协商化解分歧，切实采取措施，恢复协议权利和义务的平衡。
Under the current circumstances, we call on all parties to the JCPOA to remain calm and restrained, resolve differences through dialogue and negotiations under the JCPOA Joint Commission, and take concrete measures to restore the balance between rights and obligations in the JCPOA.
中俄作为新时代全面战略协作伙伴和全面协议坚定支持者，始终就伊核问题保持着密切沟通。
As comprehensive strategic partners of coordination for a new era and staunch supporters of the JCPOA, China and Russia have been in close communication with each other on the Iranian nuclear issue.
中方对任何有助于缓和当前局势、有助于维护全面协议的倡议，都积极支持。
China supports all proposals that will help ameliorate the current situation and preserve the JCPOA.
问：孟晚舟案庭审今天在加拿大举行，中方多次敦促加方释放孟晚舟，中方是否认为加方举行的庭审将会是公平的？
The extradition hearing for Meng Wanzhou begins today in Canada. The Chinese side has repeatedly called for her release. Is the Chinese side confident that she will receive a fair hearing in Canada?
答：中方在孟晚舟事件上的立场是一贯的、明确的。
China's position on the Meng Wanzhou case is consistent and clear.
美加两国滥用其双边引渡条约，对中国公民任意采取强制措施，严重侵犯中国公民的合法权益，这完全是一起严重的政治事件。
The US and Canada abused their bilateral extradition treaty and arbitrarily took compulsory measures against a Chinese citizen without cause. This is entirely a serious political incident that grossly violates the legitimate rights and interests of the Chinese citizen.
中国政府维护中国公民正当合法权益的决心坚定不移。
The Chinese government is steadfast in safeguarding the legitimate rights and interests of Chinese citizens.
我们再次敦促加方认真对待中方的严正立场和关切，以切实举措纠正错误，及早释放孟晚舟女士，让她平安回到中国。
Once again we urge the Canadian side to take China's position and concerns seriously, release Ms. Meng and ensure her safe return to China at an early date.
问：昨天，利比亚问题柏林峰会在德国举行，俄罗斯、中国、美国等国出席了会议。
The Berlin Conference on Libya was held yesterday in Germany, with representatives of Russia, China, the United States and other countries in attendance.
各方决定建立专门的国际机制以协调各方后续行动，并呼吁建立统一、团结、有效的利比亚政府，恢复和平对话，举行总统选举。
The participants agreed to create an international mechanism to coordinate their follow-up actions, and called for the formation of a united and effective government, resumption of peace talks and holding presidential election in Libya.
中方对此次峰会结果有何评论？
What's China's comment on the result of the conference?
答：1月19日，利比亚问题柏林峰会在德国举行。
The Berlin Conference on Libya was held in Germany on January 19.
习近平主席特别代表，中共中央政治局委员、中央外事工作委员会办公室主任杨洁篪出席会议，并阐述了中方在利比亚问题上的立场和主张。
Special Representative of President Xi Jinping, Yang Jiechi, member of the Political Bureau of the Communist Party of China (CPC) Central Committee and Director of the Office of the Foreign Affairs Commission of the CPC Central Committee, attended the meeting and expounded on China's position and propositions.
柏林峰会发表公报，反映了国际社会推动缓和利比亚紧张局势、促进利比亚问题政治解决的共同愿望。
The Conclusions of the Berlin Conference on Libya reflects the global consensus on easing the tension in Libya and seeking a political settlement of the issue.
中方在利比亚问题上一贯秉持客观公正立场，恪守联合国宪章宗旨和原则，始终尊重利比亚主权、独立和领土完整，坚持在联合国主导下推动利比亚问题政治解决进程。
China always takes an objective and fair stand on the Libya issue, abides by the purposes and principles of the UN Charter, respects Libya's sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity, and strives for the political settlement of the Libya issue under the auspices of the UN.
中方愿同国际社会一道，推动落实柏林峰会成果，为恢复利比亚和平、稳定与发展作出积极贡献。
China is ready to work with the international community for restoring peace, stability and development in Libya.
问：你提到孟晚舟事件是一起严重的政治事件，中方有人质疑加方能否确保庭审的公正。
You mentioned the Meng Wanzhou case being a political incident and questions about the fairness of the extradition proceedings here.
所以我还是想问，中方是否认为庭审会是公平的？
So I'll just ask my question again, does the Chinese government have confidence in a court in Canada to fairly examine these questions?
答：关于孟晚舟事件，中方和加方一直保持着沟通。
Regarding the case of Meng Wanzhou, China and Canada have stayed in touch with each other.
加方对中方的立场非常清楚。我们要再次敦促加方以切实举措纠正错误，早日释放孟晚舟女士，让她平安回到中国。
Once again we urge the Canadian side to take concrete measures to correct its wrongdoing, release Ms. Meng and ensure her safe return to China at an early date.
问：关于新型冠状病毒肺炎，你能否提供关于该病毒人际传播方面的信息？
Once again to the coronavirus. Do you have any information as to human-to-human infection at the moment?
答：你这个问题比较专业，建议你向主管部门询问。
I would refer you to the competent authorities as this question is a very technical one.
我这里可以告诉你的是，中方一直在采取措施积极处置疫情，制定严密的防控方案，全力救治患者，做好密切接触者管理，深入开展流行病学调查。
What I can tell you is that China has taken proactive measures to handle the situation, formulated strict prevention and control schemes, spared no effort to treat the patients, properly managed close contacts and carried out in-depth epidemiological investigations.
我们愿与各方携手努力，共同维护地区和全球的卫生安全。
We will work with all parties to jointly safeguard regional and global health security.
2020年1月17日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on January 17, 2020
一、应德方邀请，中共中央政治局委员、中央外事工作委员会办公室主任杨洁篪将作为习近平主席特别代表，赴德国出席1月19日举行的利比亚问题柏林峰会。
At the invitation of the German side, member of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee and Director of the Office of the Foreign Affairs Commission of the CPC Central Committee Yang Jiechi will attend the Libya Conference in Berlin on January 19 as President Xi Jinping's special representative.
二、经双方商定，中国文莱政府间联合指导委员会首次会议将于1月21日在北京举行，国务委员兼外交部长王毅将与文莱外交事务主管部长艾瑞万共同主持会议。
As agreed by both sides, the first meeting of the China-Brunei Intergovernmental Joint Steering Committee will be held in Beijing on January 21. State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi and Minister of Foreign Affairs II Dato Erywan Pehin Yusof of Brunei will co-chair the meeting.
问：16日，俄罗斯国家杜马通过对米舒斯京出任总理的提名，俄总统普京随后任命米舒斯京为俄新任总理。
Russia's State Duma approved the nomination of Mikhail Mishustin as prime minister on January 16. President Putin later formally signed off on Mishustin's nomination.
中方对此有何评论?
What is your comment?
答：中方对米舒斯京先生担任俄罗斯联邦政府新任总理表示欢迎，相信米舒斯京总理将领导新一届政府在国家发展振兴道路上取得新的成就。
China welcomes Mr. Mishustin's appointment as prime minister of the government of the Russian Federation. We believe that under the leadership of the new Russian government led by Prime Minister Mishustin, Russia will score new achievements on its road of development and rejuvenation.
中方愿在中俄总理定期会晤机制框架下与俄方扩大合作，共同推动中俄关系和各领域务实合作不断取得新成果。
China stands ready to expand cooperation with Russia under the regular meeting mechanism between Chinese premier and Russian prime minister for new outcomes in bilateral relations and cooperation in all sectors.
问：台湾方面表示，美国军舰本周四穿越了台湾海峡，你对此有何评论？
Taiwan announced that a US warship sailed through the Taiwan Strait on Thursday. Do you have a comment?
答：中方密切关注并全程掌握美国军舰过航台湾海峡的情况。
China paid close attention to and monitored from start to end the passage of the US military vessel through the Taiwan Strait.
台湾问题事关中国的主权和领土完整，是中美关系中最重要最敏感的问题。
The Taiwan question is the most important and most sensitive issue in China-US relations as it bears on China's sovereignty and territorial integrity.
我们敦促美方恪守一个中国原则和中美三个联合公报规定，慎重妥善处理涉台问题，以免损害中美关系和台海和平稳定。
We urge the US to abide by the one-China principle and the three China-US joint communiques, prudently and properly handle issues relating to Taiwan to avoid harming China-US relations and affecting peace and stability across the Taiwan Strait.
问：欧盟驻华大使今天接受采访时表示，欧盟将要求世贸组织审议中美签署的第一阶段经贸协议是否会扰乱市场秩序以及损害欧盟企业的利益。
The EU ambassador in Beijing told reporters today that the EU will challenge the China-US trade deal at the WTO if it causes market distortions that harm EU companies.
中方对此有何评论？
Do you have any comment on this?
答：我们已经说过多次，中美签署第一阶段经贸协议有利于中国，有利于美国，也有利于全世界。
As I said yesterday, conclusion of the phase one trade agreement between China and the US is good for China, for the US, and for the whole world.
这是一份能够稳定预期和促进繁荣的协议，符合全球生产者、消费者和投资者的利益。
It serves the interests of producers, consumers and investors all over the world as it can add predictability and promote prosperity.
同时我要强调，中美第一阶段经贸协议符合WTO规则和市场原则。
I'd also stress that this agreement is consistent with WTO rules and market principles.
问：印度方面表示，中方在联合国安理会提出审议克什米尔问题后，并未得到安理会其他成员的支持。
India has said that the Kashmir issue did not get much support from members of the UNSC after China raised the issue.
印方还表示中国应当“反思”自己在克什米尔问题上的立场。
India also said that China should review its position on the Kashmir issue.
实际上，很多安理会成员表示安理会并不是讨论相关问题的地方。
In fact, many members of the UNSC said that the forum is not a correct place to take up this issue.
应巴基斯坦的要求，联合国安理会于1月15日审议了克什米尔问题，听取了联合国秘书处等有关方面的通报。
At the request of Pakistan, the UNSC reviewed the issue of Kashmir and heard a briefing by the UN Secretariat and other sides on January 15.
安理会成员对当前克什米尔地区的局势表示担忧，呼吁遵守《联合国宪章》和国际法，通过政治对话和平解决争端，有关方面保持克制，推动紧张局势降温。
Members of the Security Council are concerned about the current situation in Kashmir, and call for observance of the UN Charter and international law, and peaceful resolution of disputes through political dialogue. They believe relevant parties should exercise restraint and deescalate the tension.
我要强调，印巴问题一直在安理会议程上，安理会应根据形势发展继续对克什米尔局势予以关注。
I shall stress that the issue between India and Pakistan has all along been on the agenda of the UNSC, and the Security Council should continue to pay attention to Kashmir in light of new developments.
安理会审议有助于缓和克区局势，推动有关问题的妥善解决。
The review at the Security Council will help ease the situation in the region and properly resolve the issue.
中方作为安理会常任理事国，将继续为维护地区和平稳定发挥建设性的作用。
As a permanent member of the Security Council, China will continue to play a constructive role in upholding regional peace and stability.
印度方面也应当认真考虑并积极回应安理会成员的要求。
India should give serious consideration and positive response to the request of UNSC members.
问：今天俄罗斯驻印度大使表示，俄方从来没有支持在联合国提出克什米尔问题，并表示有关问题应当通过双边渠道解决。
Russian ambassador to India said today that Russia has never been in favor of bringing the Kashmir issue to the UN, and it should be addressed through bilateral channels.
你有何回应？
What is your comment on this with respect to Russia's position?
答：1月15日，安理会审议了克什米尔问题，在审议过程中，大多数安理会成员都对当前局势表示担忧，也呼吁有关方面保持克制，推动紧张局势尽快降温，同时也一再强调，应通过对话等政治手段和平解决争端。
The Security Council reviewed the issue of Kashmir on January 15, during which the majority of the UNSC members expressed concerns over the current situation in Kashmir. They also called on relevant parties to exercise restraint and seek early deescalation while stressing the need to peacefully resolve disputes through political means such as dialogue.
这是我了解到的安理会审议的情况。
This is what I know about the UNSC review.
我想，俄罗斯是安理会重要成员，他的立场在讨论过程中自然得到了充分的反映。
I believe Russia's position has been fully reflected in the discussion as an important member of the UNSC.
记者：俄罗斯大使是在新德里说的上述这番话。
Follow-up: Russian ambassador made this statement today in New Delhi.
答：我了解的是在纽约讨论的情况。
What I talked about was the discussion that took place in New York.
问：你刚才提到“安理会成员对当前克什米尔地区的局势表示担忧”，但我只看到中方作了上述表态，安理会并没有发表什么声明，并且其他成员也都保持了沉默。
You said that the UNSC expressed concern over the situation in Kashmir. There was no statement from the UNSC, and this has been stated by just China alone and the other UNSC members are silent about it.
所谓“安理会成员对当前克什米尔地区的局势表示担忧”，应该只是中方自己的看法吧？不知道审议过程中各方有没有发表决议或什么官方表态？
Is it China's perception that members at the UNSC are concerned? Or was there any resolution or any kind of rather official expression of such a thing during the meeting?
答：的确，在15日审议了克什米尔问题后，安理会没有对外发表声明。
It is true that the Security Council didn't issue any statement after it reviewed the issue of Kashmir on January 15.
但中方作为安理会的常任理事国建设性地参与了有关审议，我刚才也作了介绍。
But like I just said, as a permanent member of the Security Council, China attended the review in a constructive manner.
如果你觉得中方介绍不符合事实，你可以向安理会其他成员去了解核实。
You may check with other UNSC members if you don't think what the Chinese side told is the fact.
记者：我并非是在质疑中方的说法。鉴于安理会并没有发表什么声明，我只是想确认你刚才所说的是不是代表着中方的观点。
Follow-up: I'm not questioning China's statement, but I just wanted to ask for your clarification on whether this is China's perception because there's lack of any announcement by the UNSC.
中国常驻联合国代表在会后说，安理会成员表达了关切，但其他成员并没有这么说。
The Chinese ambassador to the UN also said commenting on the meeting that concern has been expressed. But no other members have said the same thing.
答：哪些成员表达了不同的意见，你能给我介绍一下吗？哪些成员说他们对局势没有表达关切？
Could you tell me which UNSC members have said something differently? Who said they weren't concerned about the situation?
记者：除了中国以外，其他国家都没有表达关切。
Follow-up: None of the members other than China said anything like this.
答：他们只是没有公开对外表态。
They just didn't say that in public.
我刚才已经介绍了安理会审议的情况。
I already talked about the UNSC review.
如果你不相信中方的介绍，你可以自己去了解核实。
If you don't believe in that, you may check with someone else to see if it is true.
记者：印方说的是，其他安理会成员在克什米尔问题上并不支持中方的立场，很多成员表示有关问题不应在安理会讨论。
Follow-up: What India said is that none of the members at the UNSC shared China's view. The majority of the members have expressed that the UNSC is not the forum at all to discuss the Kashmir issue.
答：我们了解印方的立场，我刚才介绍的是中方的立场和态度。
We are aware of India's position, but what I talked about just now was China's position.
事实上，中印双方也就此保持着沟通。
As a matter of fact, China and India stay in touch on this issue.
记者：印方重视中印两国关系，两国领导人也致力于推动双边关系发展，这种观点在印度很普遍。
Follow-up: This is the public perception prevailing in India about this particular issue. That is, there are very serious efforts made by India and China especially over the leadership to forge a kind of relationship.
但中方屡次在安理会提及克什米尔问题，这在印度国内引发了负面反响。
So it's been viewed very negatively in India that China's repeatedly raising this.
答：中方建设性参与了联合国安理会有关克什米尔问题的讨论。
China has constructively participated in the discussion on the issue of Kashmir at the UNSC.
我们的初衷和考虑就是要敦促有关各方保持克制，推动局势尽快降温，共同维护地区的和平稳定，这完全是出于善意。
Our purpose and consideration is to call for restraint and deescalation as soon as possible for regional peace and stability. This is entirely out of goodwill.
如果印方对此有其他解读，我觉得似乎有些过度了。
I'm afraid the Indian side may have over-interpreted it if they see that in a different light.
问：你曾经说过，克什米尔问题是历史遗留问题，应当在印巴之间解决。
You said earlier that Kashmir is a matter inherent from history and it is a matter to be resolved by India and Pakistan.
那为何这次中方改变了立场呢？为何要单方面将此事置于国际场合讨论？
Then why is it that China now changes its stance and go to an international platform to raise this issue in a very partisan manner?
答：刚才我已经说得很清楚了，中方在克什米尔问题上的立场是一贯、明确的，没有改变。
I just made it very clear that China's position on the issue of Kashmir is consistent and clear. It remains unchanged.
印巴问题一直在安理会议程上。
The issue between India and Pakistan has all along been on the agenda of the UNSC.
安理会根据形势发展，对克什米尔局势表示关注，完全理所应当。
It is only natural for the Security Council to pay attention to Kashmir in light of new developments.
现在联合国在克什米尔地区还有军事观察组。
A UN military observer mission remains in Kashmir.
问：我想问的是，过去五个月，克什米尔争议地区一直实施着宵禁政策，印度方面还在该地区部署了70万兵力。
It is a fact that India has been imposing curfew in the disputed region of Kashmir for the last five months. India has also deployed more than 700,000 troops there.
中方对此有何评论？
Do you have any comment on that?
答：中方在克什米尔问题上的立场是明确的，一贯的。
China's position on the issue of Kashmir is consistent and clear.
这是历史遗留的争议，应当根据《联合国宪章》、安理会决议以及双边协定，以和平方式妥善加以解决。
It is a dispute left over from history and should be resolved properly and peacefully in accordance with the UN Charter, relevant Security Council resolutions and bilateral agreements.
中方一直呼吁印巴要保持克制，加强对话，增进互信，推动局势尽快实现降温。
China has been calling on India and Pakistan to exercise restraint, step up dialogue and enhance mutual trust to deescalate the situation as soon as possible.
同时，作为负责任的大国，我们一直与印巴双方都保持着密切沟通，愿意发挥建设性作用。
At the same time, as a responsible major country, China has been in close communication with both India and Pakistan and stands ready to play a constructive role.
问：尽管印巴之间存在这样那样的问题，但是印方还是邀请巴基斯坦总理出席即将在新德里举行的上海合作组织峰会，你对此有何评论？
Despite all those on-going issues, Pakistan's Prime Minister has been invited by India for the upcoming SCO summit in New Delhi. Your comment on this, please.
答：我以为你还要问克什米尔问题。
I thought you were going to ask about Kashmir again.
印度和巴基斯坦都是上合组织成员。
India and Pakistan are both SCO members.
我们希望，无论是印度还是巴基斯坦都能够在上合组织框架内密切地进行沟通、协调与合作，共同为推动上合组织的健康发展，在地区事务中发挥更大作用作出贡献。
It goes without saying that we hope the two sides will have close communication, coordination and cooperation under the SCO framework to contribute to the grouping's sound development and greater role in regional affairs.
印度和巴基斯坦都是南亚地区重要国家，我们鼓励印巴加强沟通，通过对话协商解决彼此间的分歧和矛盾，不断改善和发展双边关系。
India and Pakistan are both major countries in South Asia. We encourage them to strengthen communication, resolve outstanding disputes through dialogue and consultation, and constantly improve and grow bilateral relations.
2020年1月16日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on January 16, 2020
问：昨天，俄罗斯总理梅德韦杰夫向普京总统提出政府集体辞职。
The entire Russian government headed by Medvedev resigned yesterday.
普京总统随后向国家杜马提议由现任联邦税务局局长米舒斯金出任总理。
President Vladimir Putin then proposed the candidacy of Russian Federal Tax Service chief Mikhail Mishustin for the position of prime minister.
外交部对此有何评论？俄罗斯政府出现变动是否会影响中俄关系？
I wonder if the Chinese foreign ministry has any comment on that? Can any changes in the Russian government have any influence on the Russia-China bilateral relations?
答：我们注意到了有关消息。
We noted that in the news.
梅德韦杰夫先生及俄罗斯政府集体辞职是俄罗斯内政，作为友好邻邦，中方完全尊重。
The resignation of Mr. Medvedev and the Russian government is Russia's internal affair, which China, as its friendly neighbor, fully respects.
梅德韦杰夫先生作为俄罗斯国家领导人，多年来积极致力于推动中俄关系发展，特别是在中俄总理定期会晤框架下多次访华并同李克强总理举行定期会晤，为促进中俄经贸、投资、能源等务实领域合作作出了重要贡献。
During his time in office, Mr. Medvedev worked actively to promote China-Russia relations. In particular, his many trips to China and meetings with Premier Li Keqiang under the framework of regular meetings between Chinese and Russian prime ministers are worth mentioning here. He has made important contributions to bilateral practical cooperation in the fields of trade, investment and energy.
中方对此予以高度评价。
China speaks highly of all these.
我们也希望并相信梅德韦杰夫先生在新的工作岗位上，能够继续为中俄新时代全面战略协作伙伴关系发展作出自己的贡献。
We hope and believe that in his new capacity, Mr. Medvedev will continue to contribute to the development of China-Russia comprehensive strategic partnership of coordination for a new era.
至于你关心此事对中俄关系的影响，我可以告诉你，当前，在习近平主席和普京总统战略引领下，中俄全面战略协作伙伴关系迈入新时代，日益成熟稳定坚韧，不受国际风云变幻和双方各自国内政治进程的影响。
As to your question about the influence of this on bilateral relations, I can assure you, under the strategic leadership of President Xi Jinping and President Putin, China-Russia relations have stepped into a new era where the relationship is more mature, stable and resilient, immune to the changes in the international landscape and domestic politics.
中方对不断深化和发展中俄新时代全面战略协作伙伴关系始终充满信心。
China is fully confident in continuing to deepen and develop China-Russia comprehensive strategic partnership of coordination for a new era.
问：据报道，德国检方表示近日开始了针对涉华间谍案的国际调查。
German prosecutors have reportedly launched an international investigation into a suspected Chinese spy ring.
涉事的三名德国人涉嫌向中国“中间人”提供包括商业情报在内的敏感信息。
The investigation centers on three German nationals suspected of having passed on sensitive information including commercial data to Chinese handlers.
中方对此有何评论？
Can you comment on this investigation?
答：我目前还不掌握你提到的情况。
I'm not aware of this.
问：据报道，中巴经济走廊重点项目瓜达尔港已经开始受理来自阿富汗的货运业务。本周二，第一艘来自阿富汗的货轮抵达了瓜达尔港。
According to reports, Gwadar Port, a very important component of China-Pakistan Economic Corridor, has started handling transit cargo to and from Afghanistan, and the first shipment arrived at the port this Tuesday.
答：我看到了有关报道，对瓜达尔港开发建设取得新进展感到高兴。
We've seen relevant reports and are glad to note the new progress in the development of the Gwadar port.
我们支持瓜达尔港在促进地区货物贸易合作中发挥更大作用。
We would like to see the port playing a bigger role in promoting trade in goods in the region.
事实证明，中巴经济走廊不仅造福中巴两国人民，也有利于带动区域其他国家发展，提升整个区域的互联互通与经济合作水平。
As has been proven, the CPEC not only benefits the people in China and Pakistan, but also boosts the development of other countries in the region and contributes to greater regional connectivity and economic cooperation.
问：中国欧盟商会发布了有关“一带一路”倡议的报告。
About the EU Chamber of Commerce report on Belt and Road Initiative.
报告称，根据对一些欧洲国家企业参与“一带一路”项目情况的调查，只有一小部分受访企业表示获邀参与。
The European Union Chamber of Commerce in China surveyed members about their participation in the BRI and issued a report saying that only a small number of firms have been invited to participate.
报告还表示，参与“一带一路”项目的招投标规则不透明。
It also said that it's unclear how to bid for projects.
你对此有何评论？
We want to seek your comment on this.
答：你提到的这份报告我还没有来得及看。
I haven't read that report yet.
但是听你刚才介绍，他们的结论、观点恐怕有失偏颇。
But after hearing your description of it, I think their views and conclusions are inaccurate.
我们多次讲过，共建“一带一路”倡议是一个经济合作倡议和一项国际公共产品，秉持共商共建共享的“黄金法则”，坚持开放包容透明的合作理念。
As we said repeatedly, the Belt and Road Initiative is an initiative for economic cooperation and an international public good. Following the "golden principles" of extensive consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits, it champions open, inclusive and transparent cooperation.
在共建“一带一路”框架下，无论是中方企业还是外方企业，都按照市场规则和公平原则，以公开、透明的方式参与具体的合作项目。
Under the BRI framework, Chinese and foreign companies all participate in projects in an open, transparent and fair way that follows market principles.
有关项目的招投标是公开透明的。
The bidding process is open and transparent, too.
哪个企业是否以及如何参与具体项目是企业的市场行为，能否中标也主要取决于企业自身的竞争力。
Whether and how a company participates is entirely based on its market behavior, and whether a company can get the bid depends on its own competitiveness.
共建“一带一路”倡议提出6年来，已经有包括不少欧洲企业在内的各国企业积极参与到共建进程中来。
In the past six years after the BRI was proposed, a number of foreign companies including European ones have participated in it.
比如，西门子公司已经和上百家的中国企业携手开拓“一带一路”的市场，施耐德电气同中方企业在很多“一带一路”沿线国家的基础设施建设项目中开展深度合作，DHL等大批欧洲企业也积极参与“一带一路”的物流建设。
For instance, Siemens expanded its market with over a hundred Chinese firms. Schneider Electric has carried out in-depth cooperation with Chinese companies in many infrastructure building projects in BRI partner countries. DHL and many other European companies are part of BRI logistics.
这样的例子还有很多。
I have a lot of similar examples on European companies' participation in the BRI.
最后我要强调，中国政府会继续鼓励和引导中国企业按市场规则参与共建“一带一路”合作，同时也鼓励他们更多地与项目所在地企业和第三方企业合作，通过共同参与一起获得更大的发展机遇和发展空间。
I'd like to stress that the Chinese government will continue to encourage and guide Chinese companies to follow market principles in BRI cooperation. We also encourage them to engage in greater cooperation with local firms in host countries and with third parties, which will bring them bigger development opportunities and space for growth.
问：中美已经签署了第一阶段经贸协议。
After the signing of the US-China phase one trade deal, how does the Chinese government see relations with the US today?
中方如何评价现在的双边经贸关系？是迎来了崭新时期，还是依旧任重道远？
Is it dawn of a new era or still a long way to go?
答：昨天，中美双方在华盛顿签署了第一阶段经贸协议。
China and the US signed the phase one trade deal in Washington D.C. Yesterday.
在签字仪式上，中美双方都做了致辞，有关的情况你应该看到了。
Both delivered remarks at the signing ceremony, which I believe you have noted.
中方也发布了消息稿。
There has also been a detailed press release from the Chinese side.
我这里只想强调一点：中美达成第一阶段经贸协议，有利于中美两国，也有利于全世界。
I would just like to stress that, conclusion of the phase one trade agreement between China and the US is good for China, for the US, and for the whole world.
这也再次说明，中美双方完全可以在平等和相互尊重的基础上，通过对话磋商找到有关问题的妥善处理和有效解决办法。
It also shows that our two countries have the ability to act on the basis of equality and mutual respect, and work through dialogue and consultation to properly handle and effectively resolve relevant issues.
问：关于中美经贸的问题。
About the trade deal.
特朗普总统昨天表示他将在不久的将来访问中国。
President Trump said he would visit China in the not too distant future.
你能否介绍相关情况？
Do you have any information about it?
答：如果你还记得，中美两国元首去年12月20日曾经有过一次通话。双方在通话中同意，通过各种方式保持经常性的沟通与联系。
As you may recall, in a telephone call between the two heads of state on December 20, 2019, they agreed to maintain regular communication and contact through various means.
问：昨天，俄罗斯外长拉夫罗夫在新德里表示，巴西和印度应该成为联合国安理会常任理事国。
Yesterday in New Delhi, Russian foreign minister Lavrov said that India and Brazil deserve to be permanent members of the UNSC.
中方怎么看？
Can you please explain China's position on this?
答：联合国安理会作为国际集体安全机制的核心，需要通过改革更好地履行《联合国宪章》赋予的职责。
The UNSC is the core of the international collective security architecture. It needs to be reformed to better fulfill its mandate by the UN Charter.
改革应增加发展中国家的代表性和发言权，让更多中小国家有机会进入安理会参与决策。
Developing countries should be able to have a greater representation and say, and more medium- and small-sized countries should be given the opportunity to participate in decision-making.
安理会改革事关重大，涉及联合国长远发展和全体会员国切身利益，各方目前还存在巨大分歧，对改革方案缺乏广泛共识。
Reforming the Security Council is a major undertaking that bears on the long-term development of the UN and the immediate interests of all members states. As of now, with significant differences persisting, there is not yet broad-based consensus on a reform proposal.
中方愿继续同联合国会员国一道，通过对话协商，寻求兼顾各方利益和关切的“一揽子解决”方案。
China stands ready to continue working with other member states in search of a package solution that accommodates all sides' interests and concerns.
问：前天，中方发布了中印双边贸易的最新数据，显示中印之间仍存在着巨大贸易逆差。
The day before yesterday China has released its official bilateral trade data between India and China with a huge trade imbalance again.
我想问的是，自两国领导人武汉会晤之后，中方采取了哪些措施来解决中印贸易不平衡的问题？今年中方会采取哪些新举措来解决相关问题？
I'd like to know what steps China has taken after the Wuhan summit to correct this imbalance and what are the plans for China to address this issue in 2020?
答：中方始终重视印方对贸易不平衡问题的关切，我们从未追求对印贸易顺差。
China always attaches great importance to India's concerns about trade imbalance. We have never deliberately pursued a trade surplus with India.
近年来，中方采取了扩大自印度大米和食糖进口、加快印度药品和农产品输华审批等一系列措施。
In recent years, China has taken a series of measures, including increasing imports of rice and sugar and accelerating approval process for import of medical and agricultural products from India.
过去5年，中国从印度进口额增长15%，已经有越来越多的印度商品进入中国寻常百姓家庭。
Over the past five years, China's imports from India have grown by 15 percent, with more and more Indian goods finding their way to Chinese households.
2019年，印度对华贸易逆差已经明显下降。
In 2019, India's trade deficit with China has declined significantly.
在第二届中国国际进口博览会上，印度是成交量增长倍数最多的国家。
At the second China International Import Expo, the deals India secured registered the biggest increase by percentage among all countries.
中印两国都是大国，也都是G20成员。
China and India are both major countries and members of the G20.
两国经济快速增长，拥有巨大发展潜力。
The two countries enjoy rapid economic growth and boast huge development potential.
双方要用发展的眼光看待两国贸易不平衡问题，努力寻求解决问题的新思路。
Both sides should view the trade imbalance in a dynamic light and strive to find new ways to solve the problem.
去年金奈非正式会晤上，习近平主席同莫迪总理一致同意建立两国高级别经贸对话机制。
At last year's informal meeting in Chennai, President Xi Jinping and Prime Minister Modi agreed to establish a high-level economic and trade dialogue mechanism between the two countries.
希望双方相向而行，用好这一机制，加强两国贸易和投资合作关系，更好地促进两国经贸合作平衡发展。
We hope the two sides will work together to make good use of this mechanism, strengthen bilateral trade and investment cooperation, and promote the balanced development of bilateral trade.
问：昨天，俄罗斯总统普京发表年度国情咨文时表示，联合国安理会五个常任理事国应当加强协作，共同携手消除一切可能导致国际冲突的因素。五常对保障全球和平与可持续发展负有特殊责任。
During his annual address to Federal Assembly yesterday, Russian President Vladimir Putin said that five permanent members of the Security Council should work together to eliminate any preconditions for global conflicts and have a special responsibility for world peace and sustainable development.
中方对此有何评论？是否认为其他大国也应该承担同样的责任？
I wonder if China agrees with his position? Or do you think that other big countries should also bear the same responsibility?
答：中方赞同普京总统的看法。
China agrees with President Putin's view.
联合国安理会是国际集体安全机制的核心，安理会五常对维护国际和平与安全负有特殊责任。
The UNSC is the core of the international collective security architecture. The five permanent members of the Security Council shoulder special responsibilities for global peace and security.
当前国际形势中的不稳定、不确定性显著增加，地区热点问题此起彼伏，国际社会普遍呼吁坚守多边主义，加强联合国的作用。
With rising instability and uncertainty in the world and surging regional hotspot issues, the international community is calling for commitment to multilateralism and a stronger role of the UN.
今年是世界反法西斯战争胜利和联合国成立75周年，安理会五常就国际局势和重大国际地区问题深入沟通，加强协调合作，对维护多边主义和战后国际秩序、维护联合国及安理会权威、维护国际和地区和平与稳定都具有重要意义。
This year, as we mark the 75th anniversary of the victory of the world anti-Fascist war and of the founding of the UN, it is important for the five permanent members to strengthen communication over the international landscape and major international and regional issues, and step up coordination and cooperation, which will greatly contribute to upholding multilateralism and the post-war international order, the authority of the UN and the Security Council, and global and regional peace and stability.
问：美国副总统彭斯表示，中美已经开始第二阶段经贸磋商。
US Vice President Mike Pence said the US and China have begun phase two trade talks.
你能否证实？如果属实，双方在哪个工作层开展磋商？又会讨论哪些议题？
Can you confirm this and give more details on what level these talks are at and what topics they are focusing on?
答：中美已经签署了第一阶段经贸协议。
China and the US have signed the phase one trade deal.
当务之急，是双方共同努力，秉持平等和相互尊重的原则，严格遵守协议约定，照顾彼此核心关切，努力落实好第一阶段协议，这对未来中美经贸关系的发展具有重要作用。
The pressing task at the moment is for the two sides to, in the principle of equality and mutual respect, honor their commitments in the agreement, accommodate each other's core concerns and earnestly implement the deal. This is important to the trade relations between the two sides going forward.
至于你提到的具体问题，建议你向主管部门询问。
Regarding the specific question you asked about, I'll leave that to competent authorities.
问：根据中美第一阶段经贸协议的文本，中方将确保未来两年扩大购买美国的农产品，金额将不少于2000亿美元。
According to the text of the phase one trade deal, China will additionally purchase no less than 200 billion US dollars worth of agricultural products from the US in the next two years.
这是个很大的金额，中方能否兑现？
Can China ensure purchase up to this huge amount?
答：我刚才已经说了，中美达成第一阶段经贸协议，有利于中国，有利于美国，也有利于全世界。
As I just said, conclusion of the phase one trade agreement between China and the US is good for China, for the US, and for the whole world.
当务之急，是双方共同努力，切实地遵守协议的约定，照顾彼此核心关切，努力落实好第一阶段协议。
The pressing task at the moment is for the two sides to honor their commitments in the agreement, accommodate each other's core concerns and earnestly implement the deal.
问：我想知道中方对印度入常的态度到底是什么？第二个问题，关于两国贸易逆差数字，你刚才说去年两国逆差明显下降。
I'd like to know what exactly is China's position on India's entry into the UNSC? Secondly, about the figures. You said there is a dramatic drop in the trade deficit between the two countries.
过去两年，这个数字依然很大——达到580亿美元，而2019年这一数字是560亿美元。
In the past two years, it has been quite high...about $58 billion, and the new figure in 2019 was $56 billion.
考虑到去年两国贸易额下降，这一数字似乎并不明显。
Considering bilateral trade has actually declined, the difference is not very obvious.
答：关于安理会改革的问题，我刚才在回答记者提问时已经全面阐述了中方立场，没有进一步的信息可以提供。
As for the reform of the Security Council, I just expounded on China's position in a thorough manner in my reply to a previous question. I have no further information to provide.
至于你关心的中印之间贸易不平衡的问题，我刚才引用的是2019年的数据，印度对华贸易的逆差数字确实是下降了。
As for the trade imbalance between China and India you asked about, what I just shared with you was the data of 2019, which shows a clear drop in India's trade deficit with China.
我刚才也说了，中方始终高度重视印方对贸易不平衡的关切，我们也从未追求对印贸易顺差。
As I said, China always attaches great importance to India's concerns about trade imbalance. We have never deliberately pursued a trade surplus with India.
事实上，过去几年中方已采取了一系列积极的举措不断扩大从印度的进口。
In fact, in the past few years, China has taken a series of measures to expand imports from India.
我们也相信，中国国际进口博览会等平台也能够为我们增加从印度进口、解决双方贸易不平衡问题发挥积极作用。
We believe that such platforms as the CIIE can also play a positive role in increasing our imports from India and addressing the trade imbalance between the two sides.
在这个问题上，中方有足够的诚意。
All in all, China has every sincerity on this issue.
我们愿意同印方一道努力，来逐步地解决这个问题。
We are willing to work with the Indian side to gradually resolve it.
2020年1月15日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on January 15, 2020
问：据报道，英、法、德外长已联合致函欧盟外交与安全政策高级代表博雷利，并发表联合声明，宣布启动伊核问题全面协议争端解决机制，强调此举旨在促伊恢复履约。
According to reports, foreign ministers of Britain, France and Germany have sent a letter to the EU's High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy Joseph Borrell and issued a joint statement announcing the initiation of the dispute mechanism of the JCPOA. They stressed their aim was to bring Iran back to compliance.
中方对此有何评论？
What's China' s comment?
答：中方对英、法、德启动伊朗核问题全面协议争端解决机制感到遗憾，认为此举无助于解决问题，也不利于缓和当前的紧张局势。
China regrets that Britain, France and Germany have triggered the dispute mechanism of the JCPOA. We don't believe it will help solve any problem or ease any tensions.
中方始终认为，伊朗减少履行全面协议事出有因。
It is China's consistent view that there are strong reasons behind Iran's reduction of compliance.
美国单方面退出全面协议，无视国际法和国际义务，对伊进行极限施压，并阻挠其他方面履约，这是伊核紧张局势的根源所在。
The US unilaterally withdrew from this agreement. In disregard of international law and obligations, it resorted to maximum pressure on Iran and thwarted other parties' efforts to implement the deal. This is the root cause of the tensions on the Iranian nuclear issue.
全面协议是业经联合国安理会决议核可的多边外交重要成果，是国际核不扩散体系和中东地区和平稳定的重要支撑，是以国际法为基础的国际秩序的重要组成部分。
The JCPOA is an important outcome of multilateral diplomacy endorsed by UN Security Council resolution. As a pillar for the non-proliferation regime and Middle East peace and stability, it is a key component of the international order based on international law.
当前形势下，我们呼吁各方保持冷静克制，坚持在全面协议联委会框架内，通过对话协商解决履约分歧，切实采取举措，恢复协议权利和义务的平衡，全力维护和执行好全面协议。
Under current circumstances, we hope all parties will remain calm and restrained, resolve differences regarding compliance through dialogue and consultation under the JCPOA Joint Commission, and take concrete actions to preserve and implement the deal by restoring the balance of rights and obligations.
中方将继续同有关各方保持密切沟通，积极劝和促谈，推动伊核问题的政治外交解决，为维护全面协议，缓和伊核及中东地区紧张局势做出不懈努力。
China will continue to keep close communication with all parties to facilitate peace through dialogue and work for a political and diplomatic settlement of the Iranian nuclear issue. We will do all we can to help ease tensions surrounding the Iranian nuclear issue and in the Middle East.
问：俄罗斯副外长莫尔古洛夫周一同中国外交部副部长罗照辉在莫斯科举行磋商，谈及朝鲜半岛问题及中俄在亚太地区的合作，能否介绍具体情况?
On Monday Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Morgulov met with his Chinese counterpart Luo Zhaohui in Moscow and discussed the Korean Peninsula issue and Russia-China cooperation in the Asia-Pacific region. Can you give us any details of the results of the negotiations?
答：1月13日，外交部副部长罗照辉在莫斯科同俄罗斯副外长莫尔古洛夫举行磋商，就朝鲜半岛问题及亚太形势进行了深入沟通。
On January 13, Vice Foreign Minister Luo Zhaohui held consultations with his Russian counterpart Morgulov in Moscow and held in-depth exchange over the Korean Peninsula issue and Asia-Pacific.
中俄双方一致认为，延续半岛对话缓和局面，符合各方共同利益，也是国际社会普遍期待。
The two sides agreed that sustaining the momentum for dialogue and detente on the Peninsula serves the shared interests of all parties and is the common expectation of the international community.
中俄双方呼吁朝美坚持对话协商正确方向，相向而行，积极寻找打破僵局、解决相互关切的有效办法；重申支持朝韩改善关系、推进和解合作。
They called on the DPRK and the US to stick to the right direction of dialogue and consultation, move towards each other and seek effective means to break the impasse and address each other's concerns. The two sides also reiterated their support for the DPRK and the ROK in improving relations and realizing reconciliation and cooperation.
双方商定继续为推动半岛政治解决进程发挥积极作用。
They agreed to go on playing positive roles in facilitating the political settlement process on the Peninsula.
在此次磋商中，中俄双方还就亚太形势等共同关心的其他国际地区问题深入交换了意见，一致同意面对复杂多变的地区形势，中俄应当在亚太地区重大问题上进一步加强协调配合，为维护地区战略稳定、经济繁荣发挥建设性作用。
During the consultation, the two sides also exchanged views on the Asia-Pacific situation and other regional and international issues of common concern. They agreed that faced with the complex and fluid regional landscape, China and Russia should further enhance coordination and collaboration on major issues in the Asia-Pacific region to play a constructive role in maintaining strategic stability and prosperity in the region.
问：“人权观察”和“自由之家”发布了两份报告，称中国政府利用政治、经济等手段破坏人权，实施监控并操控信息，通过中国媒体扩大全球影响，对民主社会造成威胁。
There have been two reports from Human Rights Watch and Freedom House that accused the Chinese government of using political and economic power to damage human rights. They cite things like surveillance, what they described as "information manipulation", and expanding global influence through Chinese media. And they are accusing China of posing a threat to democratic society.
中方对此有何评论？
So I just wanted to ask your response.
答：你提到的这两份报告我都没看到，也没有兴趣去看。
I haven't seen the two reports and have no interest in reading them.
你也知道，这两个组织长期以来一直戴着有色眼镜看待中国。
As you know, the two organizations are entrenched in bias against China.
他们发表的涉华言论、报告一向都罔顾事实、颠倒黑白，毫无客观性可言，完全不值一驳。
Their comments or reports on China are invariably filled with distortion of facts. No objectivity at all. They are not even worth refuting.
我只想简单说两句：第一，中国的人权状况怎么样，中国人民最有发言权。
I will just state two simple points.
当前中国人权状况处于历史最好时期。
First, the Chinese people are in the best position to judge China's human rights condition, which is at its historical best.
第二，中国媒体秉持客观、公正、真实、准确的报道原则，为促进中国与世界各国之间的相互了解发挥了积极作用。
Second, Chinese media, committed to objective, impartial, true and accurate coverage, has played an active role in enhancing mutual understanding between China and other countries.
中国也一直依据宪法保障公民的言论自由。
Chinese citizens' freedom of speech, a Constitutional right, has been fully protected.
问：据报道，中国海警舰艇1月14日上午靠泊在菲律宾马尼拉港，这是中国海警舰艇首次访问菲律宾。
A China Coast Guard (CCG) vessel laid anchor at the Port of Manila on the morning of January 14, the first port call by a CCG vessel to the Philippines.
你如何评价访问的意义？
How do you characterize the significance of this visit?
答：中国海警5204舰昨天上午到访菲律宾，菲律宾方面为5204舰举行了隆重的欢迎仪式。
The CCG vessel 5204 arrived at the Philippines yesterday morning, and the Philippine side held a grand welcome ceremony for it.
中菲海警人员互登舰艇参观，并进行了友好的座谈交流。
The CCG and the Philippine Coast Guard (PCG) had cross-deck visits and held friendly exchange.
针对近期塔尔火山爆发，5204舰还将携带的储备粮捐给了当地受灾民众，表达了中国人民对菲律宾人民的善意和真情。
The CCG delegation donated its on-board reserve food supplies to locals affected by the recent Taal volcanic eruption, extending the Chinese people's goodwill and solicitude.
两国海警还将开展海上联合搜救及灭火演练，并举行舰艇开放日、体育友谊赛、甲板招待会等一系列活动。
As I understand, the CCG and the PCG will conduct joint maritime search and rescue (SAR) and fire drills, and other activities like vessel open day, friendship sports games and deck reception.
据我了解，此次中国海警舰艇访问菲律宾，是中菲海警海上合作联合委员会第三次会议系列友好交流活动的一部分。
As far as I know, this is part of the friendly exchanges scheduled for the third meeting of the Joint Coast Guard Committee (JCGC) between the CCG and the PCG.
会议期间，中菲将就海上执法合作及共同关心的问题深入交换意见，并探讨加强打击海上跨国犯罪和海上缉毒、海上搜救、人道主义救援等重点领域合作。
At this meeting, the two sides will exchange in-depth views on maritime law enforcement and other issues of mutual interest and discuss stepping up cooperation in such key areas as combating transnational crime and drug trafficking at sea, maritime SAR and humanitarian relief.
我们认为，中菲加强海警合作有利于双方进一步深化互信、增进友谊，为海上务实合作开辟新途径，为中菲关系健康稳定发展注入新动力。
We believe closer cooperation between the CCG and the PCG will enhance mutual trust and friendship between the two sides, introduce a new form of practical maritime cooperation and inject new impetus to the sound and steady development of China-Philippines relations.
此次中国海警舰艇到访菲律宾，标志着中菲海警合作迈出了新的步伐，令人鼓舞。
This inspiring port call marks a new step forward in the cooperation between the CCG and the PCG.
我们也欢迎菲律宾海警舰艇能够适时来中国访问。
We look forward to a reciprocal visit by the PCG at its convenience.
问：俄罗斯外长拉夫罗夫今天在新德里表示，欢迎伊朗申请加入上合组织。
Today Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov in New Delhi announced that Russia welcomes Iranian request for membership in Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
中方对此持何立场？
What is the position of the Chinese side for the Iranian membership in this international organization?
答：我还没看到拉夫罗夫外长的最新表态，需要了解核实一下。
I haven't seen Foreign Minister Lavrov's latest remarks and will check afterwards.
据我所知，伊朗已经是上合组织观察员，长期以来一直参加上合组织有关活动。
I understand Iran, already an observer of the SCO, has long been participating in relevant events.
在上合组织吸收新成员的问题上，中方愿与上合组织成员保持密切沟通，共同作出决定。
With regard to SCO expansion, China will stay in close communication with other members and make decisions together.
问：据报道，14日，韩国总统文在寅在新年记者会上称，发展韩朝关系有助于推动朝美对话取得进展，有利于争取国际社会对放松或豁免部分对朝制裁的支持。
ROK's President Moon Jae-in said in his New Year press conference on January 14 that improving ROK-DPRK relations will facilitate DPRK-US dialogue and also help win international support in connection with some exemptions or exceptions to sanctions on the DPRK.
中国在解决朝核问题上发挥了重要作用，韩方将与中方一道，继续合作努力解决有关问题。
China has played an important role in the Korean Peninsula nuclear issue. The ROK will work together with China to solve relevant issues.
中方对此有何评论？
What's China's comment?
答：中方始终致力于维护朝鲜半岛和平稳定、实现半岛无核化、通过对话协商解决问题，最终实现半岛长治久安。
China is committed to peace, stability and denuclearization on the Korean Peninsula. We stand for resolving outstanding issues through dialogue and consultation to realize lasting peace.
长期以来，中方为推动政治解决半岛问题作出了积极不懈努力。
China has long been doing its best to facilitate a political settlement.
当前形势下，我们愿同包括韩方在内的有关各方加强沟通协调，努力延续半岛对话缓和局面，推进半岛问题政治解决进程。
Under current circumstances, we stand ready to step up communication and coordination with all relevant parties to sustain the momentum for dialogue and detente and advance the political process.
我们也支持韩朝双方保持接触对话，改善相互关系，这符合双方和地区共同利益。
We also support DPRK-ROK engagement and dialogue to improve relations. This serves the interests of both sides as well as the entire region.
问：周一，中国外交部发布了委内瑞拉外长将访华的消息。
The foreign ministry announced on Monday that Venezuelan foreign minister will visit China.
能否介绍访问具体安排？将与中方讨论哪些议题？
Could you talk about some specific arrangements? What will be on the agenda?
答：我昨天已经回答了这个问题。
I answered a similar question yesterday.
你需要我重复吗？（记者点头）
Would you like me to repeat my answer?
应国务委员兼外交部长王毅邀请，委内瑞拉外长阿雷亚萨将于1月15日至19日对中国进行正式访问，这是今年中委两国之间重要交往之一。
At the invitation of State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi, Venezuelan Minister for Foreign Affairs Jorge Arreaza will pay an official visit to China from January 15 to 19. It is a major event in China-Venezuela exchange in 2020.
根据目前的安排，国家副主席王岐山将礼节性会见阿雷亚萨外长，王毅国务委员兼外长将同他会谈。
There will be a courtesy call with Vice President Wang Qishan and talks with State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi.
双方将就委内瑞拉问题解决方案、中委全面战略伙伴关系发展及共同关心的其他问题深入交换意见。
The two sides will hold in-depth exchange of views on how to resolve the Venezuela issue as well as advancing the two sides' comprehensive strategic partnership and other issues of common interest.
我们相信，此访有利于推动委内瑞拉问题尽快找到政治解决方案，有利于推动中委深化政治互信和务实合作，也有利于推动拉美和加勒比地区稳定发展。
We believe this visit will help find a political solution to the Venezuela issue at an early date, deepen political mutual trust and practical cooperation between China and Venezuela, and maintain stability and development in Latin America and the Caribbean.
有关情况我们会及时发布消息。
We will keep you updated when there is more information.
问：美国总统特朗普一直向英国施压，要求英方禁止使用华为5G技术，但是约翰逊首相昨天说他不知道还有什么更好的选项。
US President Trump has been pressuring the UK to block Huawei from its 5G network, but UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson said yesterday that he doesn't know a better option that exists.
你对此有何评论？
What's the foreign ministry's view?
答：我注意到有关报道，我想你可能也注意到了，华为方面已经就此事对外作出了回应。
I noted reports on this. Perhaps you have seen Huawei's response.
我想说的是，华为在英国开展业务多年，投资数十亿英镑，支撑了数万个就业岗位，建立了联合研究中心，积极履行企业社会责任。
Throughout its many years of presence in the UK, Huawei has invested several billion pounds, supported tens of thousands of local jobs, and established joint research centers. It earnestly fulfills its corporate social responsibilities.
我们希望英方能够采取客观公正态度，独立自主作出符合自身利益的抉择，为中国企业提供一个公平、公正、开放、非歧视的营商环境。
We hope the UK will take an objective and fair attitude, make independent decisions based on its own interests, and provide an fair, just, open, and non-discriminatory business environment for Chinese companies.
这也有利于中国企业继续保持对英国市场的信心和预期。
This is very important for Chinese investors to keep up their confidence and faith in the British market.
这里我不得不再次指出，美方一段时间以来在拿不出任何证据的情况下，泛化国家安全概念，滥用国家力量，无理打压特定中国企业，对别国的5G网络建设互利合作指手画脚，赤裸裸地强拉甚至威胁其他国家要采取与美一致的立场。
I have to stress once more that the US has been stretching the concept of national security and abusing state power to wantonly oppress certain Chinese companies without any evidence. It has also been making uninvited comments on other countries' mutually beneficial 5G cooperation, browbeating others even with outright threats into taking its stand.
这种经济霸凌行径是对美方自己一贯标榜的市场经济原则的公然否定，严重损害美国自身信誉和形象，也将损害美国企业的利益。
Such economic bullying is an open denial of the principle of market economy that the US claims to champion. It's a heavy blow to America's credibility and image and will hurt US businesses' interests.
我们敦促美方停止泛化国家安全的错误做法，停止对中国的抹黑和指责，停止对中国企业的无理打压。
We urge the US to stop abusing the concept of national security, and cease its smear campaign against China and oppression against Chinese companies.
美方污蔑中国、打压中国企业的真实意图是什么，我相信任何秉持客观公正立场的国家都看得清清楚楚，明明白白。
Any impartial country will see clearly the real intention behind all these attempts.
问：有报道称王毅国务委员即将赴肯尼亚访问。
There are some media reports of an expected visit of Foreign Minister Wang Yi to Kenya.
你能否介绍情况？
Could you please provide some details on that?
答：去哪访问？
A visit to where?
记者：去肯尼亚蒙巴萨。
Journalist: Mombasa, Kenya.
答：你是说“即将”吗？他已经去过了。
Did you say he was going there? As a matter of fact, he has already left Kenya.
记者：报道说他已经回来了。
Journalist: Reports say he is back now.
答：对，中方已经发布了消息。
Yes, we've issued a press release on this.
1月10日，在非洲访问的国务委员兼外长王毅经停肯尼亚，其间他会见了肯尼亚外长朱马，同时还乘坐蒙内铁路的客运列车，考察这一合作项目的运行情况。
On January 10, State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi had a stopover in Kenya on his visit to Africa, during which he met with Kenyan Foreign Minister Monica Juma and went on a trip aboard the Mombasa-Nairobi Standard Gauge Railway passenger train to see how the project is running.
有关情况中方发布了非常详细的消息稿，建议你查阅。
There is a detail-rich press release on it that you may find useful.
问：和华为有关的问题。
To follow up on the Huawei situation.
有报道称，美国政府正进一步考虑限制中方从美方获取技术，特别是在半导体领域。
We are seeing reports that the US government is further considering to limit the technologies that China can get from the US, especially in relations to the semi-conductor industry.
中国政府将会采取什么措施来保障中国企业获取外方技术？如何保障企业的技术供应不受影响？第二个问题，荷兰媒体报道，中国驻荷兰大使就荷兰半导体企业ASML公司可能停止向中国出口产品一事发表了评论。
So my question is, what can the Chinese government do to safeguard companies' supply chain and access to technology? And a related question is on some similar reports coming from the Netherlands about a semi-conductor company ASML. We heard comments from the ambassador of China to the Netherlands on the prospect of a ban on ASML exports to China.
你对此有何评论？
Could you provide some comments, please?
答：针对美方近来一系列的言行，中方已经多次阐明立场。
In response to recent US moves, China has made clear its position on many occasions.
我们要求美方停止泛化国家安全概念，停止滥用国家力量，停止无理打压中国企业。
We urge the US to stop using national security as a catch-all phrase and abusing national power to oppress Chinese businesses.
经济全球化发展到今天，全球产业链、供应链、价值链高度融合，美方一些做法不仅损害中方企业的利益，也严重损害美国企业以及其他国家企业的利益，已经遭到了美国国内产业界的反对。
Riding on the tide of globalization, the global industrial chain, supply chain and value chain have become highly integrated. Certain US practices have hurt the interests of not only Chinese businesses, but also American companies and those of other countries.
我们呼吁美方倾听产业界的理性声音，停止对中国的抹黑和对中国企业的打压，实实在在地为促进5G和其他行业高科技的开发利用创造有利条件，作出自己的贡献。
We call on the US to heed the rational call of industries, stop slandering and oppressing Chinese businesses and make concrete contributions to the development and appliance of 5G and other hi-techs by creating enabling conditions for them.
至于你提到荷兰方面具体问题，我需要核实一下。
Regarding what you mentioned about the Netherlands, I will need to check on that.
问：台湾地区领导人蔡英文接受了BBC的采访。她表示台湾已经“独立”，台湾和中国是两个国家。你对她有关言论作何评论？
Does the foreign ministry have any comment on what was said by the leader of the Taiwan region Tsai Ing-wen in a BBC interview that Taiwan is already independent and has a separate identity from China?
答：两岸关系的问题，你应该向国台办询问。
I will refer you to the Taiwan Affairs Office of the State Council for cross-Strait issues.
我可以告诉你，世界上只有一个中国，中华人民共和国是代表中国的唯一合法政府，台湾是中国不可分割的一部分。
What I can tell you is that there is but one China in the world. The People's Republic of China is the sole legal government representing the whole of China. Taiwan is an inalienable part of the Chinese territory.
一个中国原则是国际社会的普遍共识。
And the one-China principle is the universal consensus of the international community.
问：中国关于中美经贸第一阶段协议的翻译工作是否完成了？是否准备在中美双方签署协议当天公布文本内容？
Is the translation of the US-China phase one trade agreement completed and ready to be released on the day of the signing?
答：你的同事前天已经问过这个问题了。
I believe your colleague asked the same question the other day.
我的回答是，建议你们保持关注。
Please stay tuned for updates.
该来的会来，该有的也都会有。
What shall come will come. It's just a matter of time.
2020年1月14日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on January 14, 2020
国家主席习近平特使、科技部部长王志刚将于1月14日赴阿曼出席卡布斯苏丹吊唁活动。
President Xi Jinping's special envoy and Minister of Science and Technology Wang Zhigang will travel to Oman on January 14 to offer condolences over the passing of Sultan Qaboos Bin Said.
问：委内瑞拉外长阿雷亚萨将于明天访华，你能否介绍此访有关安排？阿雷亚萨外长在华期间，是否将会见中国能源企业的代表？
Tomorrow Venezuelan Foreign Minister Jorge Arreaza will start his visit to China. Could you provide any details of his visit? Are there any plans to meet with representatives of Chinese energy companies?
答：应国务委员兼外交部长王毅邀请，委内瑞拉外长阿雷亚萨将于1月15日至19日对中国进行正式访问，这是今年中委两国之间重要交往之一。
At the invitation of State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi, Venezuelan Foreign Minister Jorge Arreaza will pay an official visit to China from January 15 to 19. It is a major event in China-Venezuela exchange in 2020.
国家副主席王岐山将礼节性会见，王毅国务委员兼外长将同他会谈。
There will be a courtesy call with Vice President Wang Qishan and talks with State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi.
双方将就委内瑞拉问题解决方案、中委全面战略伙伴关系发展及共同关心的其他问题深入交换意见。
The two sides will exchange views on how to resolve the Venezuela issue as well as advancing the two sides' comprehensive strategic partnership and other issues of common interest.
我们相信，此访有利于推动委问题尽快找到政治解决方案，有利于推动中委深化政治互信和务实合作，也有利于推动拉美和加勒比地区稳定发展。
We believe this visit will help find a political solution to the Venezuela issue at an early date, deepen political mutual trust and practical cooperation between China and Venezuela, and maintain stability and development in Latin America and the Caribbean.
问：有消息称，根据中美达成的第一阶段经贸协议，中国未来两年将增加自美购买价值800亿美元的制造业产品，500亿美元的能源产品以及350亿美元的服务业产品。
Some sources say China will buy an additional $80 billion of manufactured goods, $50 billion more in energy supplies, and services by $35 billion from the United States over the next two years under the phase one trade deal.
中方对此有何评论？
Does China have any comment on it?
答：对于中美经贸磋商以及第一阶段经贸协议的具体问题，我建议你向商务部询问。
I would refer you to the Ministry of Commerce for specifics regarding China-US trade consultations and the phase one trade deal.
另外，请你保持耐心，过两天情况可能会更明了。
Please stay patient for a little longer as more information may come out in a couple of days.
问：两个问题：第一，美国国务卿蓬佩奥本周一表示，美国科技企业要对中国保持警惕，不要助长中方“奥威尔式的监控”行为。
Two questions. On Monday US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo warned US tech companies against China's so-called "Orwellian surveillance state".
中方有何评论？第二，美国财政部将中国从“汇率操纵国”名单中移除，中方有何评论？
Does the foreign ministry have any comment on that? And how does China view the US Treasury decision to remove the currency manipulator label for China?
答：关于第一个问题，我还没看到你提到的美方最新的表态，需要了解核实一下。
On your first question, I haven't seen the latest remarks from the US and will need to check for more information.
但美方发表类似的言论已经不止一次了。
However, this won't be the first time the US has made such remarks.
美方个别人总是习惯编造谎言攻击抹黑中国，这种做法不仅损害美国自己的国际信誉，而且已经遭到越来越多国家的质疑和抵制。
Certain people in America keep attacking and smearing China by force of habit. This has not only tarnished America's international credibility, but also been questioned and rejected by more and more countries.
我们敦促美方放弃对华偏见和执念，为中美关系的发展营造有利的氛围。
We urge the US to give up its consistent prejudice against China and work to create an enabling atmosphere for the development of China-US relations.
至于你提的第二个问题，第一，中国本来就不是汇率操纵国。
On your second question, to begin with, China is never a currency manipulator.
美方的最新结论符合事实以及国际社会共识。
The latest US conclusion is consistent with facts and international consensus.
最近一次国际货币基金组织（IMF）的评估结论认为，人民币汇率水平大体上是符合经济基本面的，客观上否认了中国是“汇率操纵国”的说法。
The IMF concludes in a most recent report that the RMB exchange rate level is broadly in line with fundamentals, essentially dismissing the view that China is a currency manipulator.
第二，中国是一个负责任的大国，我们曾多次重申不会搞竞争性货币贬值，没有也不会将汇率作为工具来应对贸易争端等外部扰动。
Second, as a responsible major power, China has stated repeatedly that it will not resort to competitive currency devaluation or use the exchange rate as a tool in dealing with external disturbances such as trade disputes.
第三，中国将坚定不移地深化汇率市场化改革，继续完善以市场供求为基础、参考一篮子货币进行调节、有管理的浮动汇率制度，保持人民币汇率在合理均衡水平上的基本稳定。
Third, China will resolutely deepen market reform of the exchange rate regime, continue to improve the managed, floating regime based on market supply and demand and with reference to a basket of currencies, and keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
问：王毅国务委员已经结束对非洲访问，很快将回到北京。
State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi has wrapped up his visit to Africa and will soon be back to Beijing.
你如何评价王毅国务委员此次新年首次出访？
How do you comment on his first visit in the new year?
答：王毅国务委员兼外长此次访问非洲，是中国外长连续第30年把非洲作为每年首次出访目的地。
Africa has been the destination for Chinese foreign ministers' first overseas visits each year, and State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang's visit this time marks the 30th consecutive year of this practice.
中国外长新年首访非洲这一独一无二的做法，充分体现了中非世代友好、患难与共的特殊情感，也表明发展同非洲国家的友好合作关系始终是中国外交一以贯之的基本政策和坚定不移的战略选择。
The unique tradition fully reflects the special friendship China and Africa have long cherished through weal and woe. It also shows that developing friendly and cooperative relations with African countries has been China's basic policy and unswerving strategic choice in foreign affairs.
无论是过去、现在还是将来，无论国际风云如何变幻，也无论别人怎么说，中非之间的深厚友谊都将牢不可破，中国都将始终坚定地同非洲兄弟站在一起。
The profound friendship between China and Africa has been and will remain unbreakable no matter how the international landscape changes or what others say. China will always stand firmly with our African brothers.
此访期间，王毅国务委员同非方领导人及外长就巩固双边关系、深化互利合作深入交换意见，达成广泛共识。
During his visit, State Councilor Wang Yi exchanged views and reached broad consensus with African leaders and foreign ministers on consolidating bilateral relations and deepening mutually beneficial cooperation.
双方均表示，要加快落实中非合作论坛北京峰会成果，高质量推进共建“一带一路”合作，深化各领域的务实合作。
Both sides noted the need to speed up the implementation of the outcomes of the FOCAC Beijing Summit, promote high quality BRI development and deepen practical cooperation in various fields.
双方均认为，当前中非关系处于历史最好时期，中非合作的未来充满希望，中非合作必将继续走在国际对非合作的前列。
Both sides agreed that China-Africa relationship is at its historical best with promising cooperation in the future. The China-Africa cooperation will continue to take the lead in international cooperation with Africa.
面对当前复杂多变的国际形势，中非双方都表示，要继续加强战略沟通协作，共同捍卫多边主义和国际关系基本准则，反对单边主义和霸凌行径，反对外来干涉，坚定地站在历史正确的一边，站在公道正义的一边，站在广大发展中国家共同利益一边。
Facing the complex and fluid international landscape, both sides vowed to continue to strengthen strategic communication and cooperation, jointly uphold multilateralism and basic norms governing international relations, oppose unilateralism and bullying behavior, reject foreign interference, firmly stand on the right side of history and justice, and stand for the common interests of developing countries.
双方重申，将在涉及彼此核心利益问题上继续相互坚定支持，非方领导人和外长明确重申坚持一个中国原则，明确主张台湾是中国领土不可分割的一部分。
The two sides reaffirmed that they will continue to firmly support each other on issues concerning each other's core interests. African leaders and foreign ministers clearly reiterated their commitment to the one-China principle and that Taiwan is an inalienable part of China's territory.
中方愿同非方一道，以王毅国务委员此次访问为契机，进一步夯实中非传统友谊，推动中非务实合作提质增效，加强国际协调合作，携手构建更加紧密的中非命运共同体。
Taking State Councilor Wang Yi's visit as an opportunity, China stands ready to work with Africa to cement our traditional friendship, enhance the quality and efficiency of our practical cooperation, strengthen international coordination and cooperation and jointly build a closer community with a shared future for China and Africa.
问：据报道，王毅国务委员兼外长今天访问了斯里兰卡，会见了斯里兰卡外长，你能否证实？
Reports say State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi visited Sri Lanka today and met with the Sri Lankan foreign minister. Can you confirm this?
另外，俄罗斯外长拉夫罗夫今天可能也将会见斯外长，请问王毅国务委员是否会同拉夫罗夫外长会见？
Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov may also meet with the Sri Lankan foreign minister today. Will there be a meeting between State Councilor Wang and Foreign Minister Lavrov?
答：王毅国务委员兼外长结束对非洲的访问后于13日至14日经停斯里兰卡。经停期间，王毅国务委员会见了斯方领导人，就中斯关系以及共同关心的国际和地区问题深入交换意见。
After concluding his visit to Africa, State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi had a stopover in Sri Lanka from the 13th to the 14th, during which he met with Sri Lanka leaders and discussed bilateral relations as well as international and regional issues of common interest.
中国和斯里兰卡传统友好，两国是真诚互助、世代友好的战略合作伙伴。
China and Sri Lanka are strategic cooperative partners with sincere mutual assistance and ever-lasting friendship built upon a long tradition of friendly exchanges.
近年来，双方在共建“一带一路”框架下推进各领域务实合作，取得丰硕成果。
Recent years has seen fruitful cooperation under the Belt and Road framework.
中方愿同斯新政府一道，传承传统友谊，加强政治互信，对接发展战略，推动双边关系不断迈上新台阶。
China stands ready to work with Sri Lanka's new administration to carry forward the traditional friendship, strengthen political mutual trust, dovetail development strategies and bring bilateral relations to new heights.
中方会及时发布有关消息。
We will release more information in a timely manner.
至于你关心中俄外长是否会在斯里兰卡会面，我目前没有这方面的消息。
As to whether there will a meeting between the Chinese and Russian foreign ministers, I have nothing to update you at the moment.
2020年1月13日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on January 13, 2020
一、应世界经济论坛创始人兼执行主席施瓦布和瑞士联邦副主席帕默林邀请，中共中央政治局常委、国务院副总理韩正将于1月20日至21日出席达沃斯世界经济论坛2020年年会并访问瑞士。
At the invitation of Klaus Schwab, Founder and Executive Chairman of the World Economic Forum, and Guy Parmelin, Vice President of the Swiss Confederation, Han Zheng, Member of the Standing Committee of the Political Bureau of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China and Vice Premier of the State Council, will attend the 2020 Annual Meeting of the World Economic Forum in Davos and visit Switzerland from January 20 to 21.
二、应国务委员兼外交部长王毅邀请，委内瑞拉玻利瓦尔共和国人民政权外交部长豪尔赫·阿雷亚萨将于1月15日至19日对中国进行正式访问。
At the invitation of State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi, Jorge Arreaza, Minister of Popular Power for Foreign Affairs of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, will pay an official visit to China from January 15 to 19.
问：伊朗军方承认意外击落乌克兰客机。
Iranian military admitted that they mistakenly shot down the Ukrainian jetliner.
中方对此有何评论？
I wonder what is China's comment on this?
答：中方对发生乌克兰客机坠毁这起悲剧感到痛心，对遇难者表示深切哀悼，对遇难者家属表示诚挚慰问。
We are deeply saddened by this tragic Ukrainian plane crash. We express deepest condolences to the victims and sincere sympathies to the bereaved families.
我们注意到有关方面就此事保持着沟通，希望这一事件能够得到妥善处置，避免局势进一步复杂化。
Relevant parties are in communication regarding this and we hope to see a proper settlement to avoid further complication.
问：我们注意到，中国外交部自2019年12月开通了推特账号，请问中方目的是什么？
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of China started using Twitter from December 2019. Can you tell us its purpose?
答：首先我要感谢你关注外交部发言人办公室开通了推特帐号。
First I would like to thank you for your interest in our Twitter account.
实际上，很多中国驻外使领馆及中国驻外外交官也都开通了境外社交媒体账号。
As a matter of fact, many Chinese embassies and consulates as well as diplomats posted overseas have opened social media accounts.
同其他国家的外交部门和外交官一样，我们在推特等一些境外的社交媒体平台上开通帐号，目的就是为了更好地对外进行沟通，更好地介绍中国的情况、中国的政策。
Just like other countries' diplomatic posts and diplomats, our presence in social media platforms overseas like Twitter aims to do a better job in telling the story of China, with its realities and policies, to the world.
我们愿通过推特等社交媒体平台与外界加强沟通交流，增进相互了解。
We hope to make use of such platforms to facilitate exchange and promote mutual understanding.
问：中国副总理刘鹤将于1月15日同美方签署第一阶段经贸协议。
Vice Premier Liu He is going to sign the phase one trade deal in the US, I believe on the 15th.
请问中方是否会在协议签署后公开协议文本？
We wanted to know if China will be releasing the text of the trade deal after this signature?
答：我建议你保持关注。
Please stay tuned for further updates.
问：据报道，昨日，“人权观察”组织执行董事罗斯表示他被禁止入境香港。
Human Rights Watch executive director Kenneth Roth said yesterday he was barred from entering Hong Kong.
你能否证实？如属实，这是否是中国中央政府向香港特区政府下达的命令？原因又是什么？
Is this true and was this an order from the central government? And if so, what was the reason?
答：中国中央政府和香港特区政府一向依法处理出入境事务，允许或不允许谁入境是中国的主权。
China's central government and the Hong Kong SAR government handle border entry and exit matters in accordance with law. It is China's sovereign right to decide who shall be granted entry and who shall be denied it.
这里我还想指出，大量事实和证据表明，有关非政府组织通过各种方式支持反中乱港分子，极力教唆他们从事极端暴力犯罪行为，煽动“港独”分裂活动，对当前香港乱局负有重大责任。
I also want to point out that abundant facts and evidence have shown that the NGOs concerned have been supporting anti-China rioters in Hong Kong through various means, inciting violence and inflaming separatist activities for "Hong Kong independence". They bear major responsibility for the current chaos in Hong Kong.
这些组织理应受到制裁，也必须付出应有代价。
Sanctions on these organizations are therefore fully justified as they should pay the price for what they've done.
问：美国宣布对伊朗的8名高官实施新一轮的制裁。
The US introduced new sanctions against Iran targeting eight high-level officials.
制裁还涉及中方实体。
The sanctions also included some Chinese entities.
中方对此有何评论？是否会继续与伊朗在相关领域开展合作？
I wonder what's China's comment and if China is going to maintain cooperation with Iran in these areas?
答：我们的原则立场非常清楚，也非常明确，那就是中方一贯反对单边制裁和所谓的“长臂管辖”。
To begin with, our principled position is clear-cut. We are against unilateral sanctions and the so-called "long-arm jurisdiction".
我们认为动辄使用制裁和以制裁相威胁根本解决不了问题。
We believe wanton use or threat of sanctions won't solve any problem.
中方一贯主张，在处理国家关系时应当遵守联合国宪章的宗旨和原则以及国际关系基本准则，应当通过对话谈判等和平方式妥善解决彼此间的矛盾分歧。
We hold that purposes and principles of the UN Charter and basic norms governing international relations should be complied with in state-to-state relations; differences should be properly handled in peaceful ways through dialogue and negotiation.
中方呼吁，各方尊重事情本身的是非曲直，坚持政治解决的大方向，以实际行动推动中东海湾地区的局势实现降温、走向缓和，共同维护这一地区的和平与稳定。
China calls on all parties concerned to view what has happened based on their own merits and stick to the general direction of political settlement. Concrete steps should be taken to defuse the Gulf situation and jointly uphold regional peace and stability.
至于你刚才提到美方宣布的制裁也包括中方实体，我可以告诉你的是，长期以来，中伊两国在国际法的框架内，在各个领域开展互利友好合作，合理合法，也不损害第三方的利益，理应受到尊重和保护。
As to the US sanctions on Chinese entities, I'd like to point out that for a long time, China and Iran have been conducting mutually-beneficial cooperation in various sectors within the framework of international law. Such cooperation, which is justified and lawful and doesn't harm any third party's interests, should be respected and protected.
我们敦促美方立即停止制裁中方实体的错误作法，我们也将坚定维护自身合法权益。
We urge the US to cease immediately the wrongful sanctions on Chinese businesses. We will continue to staunchly defend Chinese enterprises' legitimate rights and interests.
问：接着之前记者的提问，你的意思是说中央政府确实曾授意香港特区政府禁止“人权观察”组织执行董事罗斯入境吗？
To follow up on the earlier question about Human Rights Watch executive director Kenneth Roth being barred from entering Hong Kong, does your answer mean the central government liaised with the Hong Kong SAR government in this particular decision?
答：我刚才已经说了，中国中央政府和香港特区政府一向依法处理出入境事务，允许或不允许谁入境是中国的主权。
As I just said, China's central government and the Hong Kong SAR government handle border entry and exit matters in accordance with law. It is China's sovereign right to decide who shall be granted entry and who shall be denied it.
问：王毅国务委员在非洲访问期间同非方领导人就共建“一带一路”交换看法。
State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi discussed the cooperation on the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) with African leaders on his visit to Africa.
此前，一些西方政客称中方借助“一带一路”让非洲国家陷入“债务陷阱”。
Previously certain western politicians said China dragged African countries into "debt traps" with the BRI.
不久前，美国国际开发金融公司负责人接受《金融时报》采访时称，由于债务过高、缺乏透明度等问题，中国在全球进行的基础设施投资完全是座“纸牌屋”，注定崩溃。
Not long ago, the chief executive of the US International Development Finance Corporation claimed in an interview with Financial Times that China's international infrastructure investments are like a "House of Cards" because of debt overload and lack of transparency, which led him to predict that it's only a matter of time before it collapses.
答：我不知道有人把“一带一路”倡议和“债务陷阱”，还有“纸牌屋”联系在一起有什么根据。
I don't see any basis for the linkage certain people claim to see between the BRI and "debt traps", "house of cards" or whatnot.
我知道的是，没有任何一个国家因为中国的投资而陷入债务危机，对“一带一路”倡议的质疑、抹黑，从来就没有阻止“一带一路”国际合作不断发展壮大，也从来没有影响世界上绝大多数国家参与共建“一带一路”的热情。
What I know is that not a single country has fallen into a debt crisis because of Chinese investment. Criticism and slanders have never stopped BRI cooperation from growing and flourishing or dampened the enthusiasm in the BRI among the vast majority of countries.
目前，我们已经同137个国家和30个国际组织签署199份“一带一路”合作文件，这其中就包括44个非洲国家和非盟委员会。
To date we have signed 199 BRI cooperation documents with 137 countries and 30 international organizations, including 44 African countries and the African Union Commission.
我想这是国际社会也是非洲兄弟用行动对共建“一带一路”倡议投出的信任票，也是对一些人恶意中伤的最好回应。
This is a vote of confidence from the international community including our African brothers and the best response to certain people's malicious smears.
王毅国务委员正在非洲访问，他到访的国家无一不对共建“一带一路”国际合作给予高度评价。
State Councilor Wang Yi is visiting Africa as we speak. All the countries he's been to have spoken highly of BRI cooperation.
王毅国务委员上周五经停肯尼亚期间，专门乘坐蒙内铁路列车进行项目考察。
During his stopover in Kenya last Friday, State Councilor Wang went on a trip aboard the Mombasa-Nairobi Standard Gauge Railway (SGR) passenger train.
蒙内铁路建设期间累计创造3万个本地就业岗位，带动肯尼亚经济增长了1.5个百分点，既解决了当地运输需要，大幅降低运输成本，也达到了高标准的环保要求。
During its construction, the railway project created a total of 30,000 local jobs, raising Kenya's economic growth by 1.5 percentage points. It meets local transportation needs at much lower costs while reaching high environmental standards.
现在，“乘坐标轨铁路火车”已经成为体验肯尼亚必选的“打卡”项目。
A ride on the SGR train has become a must-try experience in Kenya.
蒙内铁路正在成为中肯和中非友谊新的象征，成为中非互利共赢新的标杆，堪称新时代的坦赞铁路。
Hailed as the "Tanzania-Zambia Railway in a new era", the Mombasa-Nairobi railway has become a new symbol of China-Kenya and China-Africa friendships and a new benchmark for win-win cooperation between China and Africa.
非洲有一句谚语叫做“青蛙的鼓噪，岂能阻止牛到河边饮水”。
As an African proverb goes, "The croak of frogs will not stop a cow from drinking in the river."
不管个别国家或个别人如何攻击抹黑，中方都将始终秉持“共商共建共享”原则，同非方一道，推动高质量共建“一带一路”在非洲走深走实，结出更多硕果，更好造福非洲和非洲人民。
Regardless of smears and slanders by certain country or person, China will as always follow the principle of joint consultation and contribution for shared benefits and work with the African side to deepen high-quality BRI cooperation for more tangible outcomes and deliver more benefits to Africa and the people of this continent.
问：据彭博社报道，美国陆军将在太平洋地区部署一支特遣部队以加强对抗中国和俄罗斯。美陆军部长麦卡锡接受采访时表示，该部队旨在协助应对那些可能阻止美国航母战斗群靠近亚洲大陆的国家。
Bloomberg reported that the US Army plans to deploy a specialized task force to the Pacific to help neutralize some capabilities China and Russia already possess and are intended to keep US carrier groups away from the Asian mainland, said US Army Secretary Ryan McCarthy in an interview.
美方这一决定不仅是军事问题，而且会影响整个地区的地缘平衡。
The decision is not just a military issue, but could impact the geopolitical equilibrium of the whole region.
答：你刚才提到的消息，我还没有看到，需要去了解核实一下。
I haven't seen the Bloomberg report and will need to get more information about it.
我可以告诉你的是，中国始终是世界和平的建设者、全球发展的贡献者、国际秩序的维护者。
What I can say is that China is committed to defending world peace, advancing global development and upholding international order.
中国力量的发展壮大有益于世界和平发展事业。
A stronger China will make greater contribution to peace and development throughout the world.
我们希望有关国家的举措和言行有利于促进地区国家间的互信与合作，也有利于维护地区的和平稳定。
We hope what the country concerned says and does will be conducive to enhancing regional countries' mutual trust and cooperation and maintaining regional peace and stability.
2020年1月10日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on January 10, 2020
一、应莫桑比克共和国总统纽西邀请，国家主席习近平特使、全国人大常委会副委员长蔡达峰将赴莫桑比克首都马普托出席于1月15日举行的纽西总统就职仪式。
At the invitation of President Filipe Jacinto Nyusi of the Republic of Mozambique, Cai Dafeng, Special Envoy of President Xi Jinping and Vice Chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress, will attend President Nyusi's inauguration ceremony on January 15 in Maputo, Mozambique.
二、经双方商定，外交部副部长乐玉成将于1月14日同日本外务事务次官秋叶刚男在西安举行第十五轮中日战略对话。
Vice Foreign Minister Le Yucheng and Japanese Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs Takeo Akiba will hold the 15th round of China-Japan Strategic Dialogue on January 14 in Xi'an, as agreed by both sides.
双方将就双边关系和共同关心的国际和地区问题深入交换意见。
The two sides will exchange views on bilateral ties and regional and international issues of mutual interest.
中日战略对话是两国外交部门进行高级别战略沟通的重要渠道。
China-Japan Strategic Dialogue is an important platform for the two foreign ministries to conduct high-level strategic communication.
当前中日关系总体保持改善发展势头，中方希望双方通过此轮对话进一步凝聚共识、增进互信，为顺利实施双边重大政治议程、推动两国关系更好发展创造有利条件。
At present, China-Japan relations are improving and developing with a sound momentum. China hopes that through the new round of dialogue, the two sides will further consolidate consensus, enhance mutual trust and create favorable conditions to implement major bilateral political agenda and boost bilateral relations.
问：刘鹤副总理将赴华盛顿签署中美第一阶段经贸协议。能否介绍中方代表团成员？具体是哪天签署协议？
Do you have information on who is going with Vice Premier Liu He to Washington next week and on what day will the phase one trade deal be signed?
答：昨天商务部新闻发言人在记者会上已经回答了有关问题，我没有进一步的信息可以提供。
The spokesperson of the Ministry of Commerce responded to similar questions at a press briefing yesterday. I have nothing to update you at the moment.
问：关于中美签署第一阶段经贸协议的问题，我记得上次中美元首阿根廷会晤后，中方举行了中外记者吹风会，王毅国务委员兼外长向媒体介绍了情况。
A question on the signing of the phase one trade deal between China and the US. As I recall, after the two presidents met in Argentina, there was a press conference held by the Chinese side where State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi briefed us about the meeting.
请问此次刘鹤副总理访美是否也有此类媒体安排？
I wonder if there is similar press arrangement for Vice Premier Liu He's visit to the US this time?
答：你应该注意到，昨天商务部发布的消息中有一句话“双方团队正在就协议签署的具体安排密切沟通”。
I'd like to quote the Ministry of Commerce's press release yesterday, as you may recall, "The two teams are in close communication regarding specific arrangements of the signing of the deal."
我想具体安排包括方方面面，也包括媒体方面的安排。
I believe "specific arrangements" cover everything necessary including those relating to the press.
如果有这方面的信息，我们会及时通知大家。
We will let you know if there is any new information on that.
问：关于第十五轮中日战略对话，请问时间、地点的选择是否有特殊意义？双方会不会谈到中日第五份政治文件？
Does the date and venue of the 15th China-Japan Strategic Dialogue bear any special significance? Is the fifth political document between China and Japan on the agenda?
答：关于你提到第五份政治文件的问题，目前我没有可以提供的信息。
On the fifth political document you asked about, I don't have anything for you at the moment.
关于第十五轮中日战略对话的时间、地点，我理解这是经双方商定作出的安排。
As to the date and venue of the 15th China-Japan Strategic Dialogue, I understand it was decided by both sides.
2020年1月9日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on January 9, 2020
问：昨天，美国总统特朗普表示，美永远不会允许伊朗拥核。英、法、德、俄、中应认清现实，摆脱伊核协议。我们要共同努力同伊达成使世界更加安全、和平的协议。
US President Trump said yesterday that the US will never allow Iran to have a nuclear weapon, that the UK, France, Germany, Russia and China need to recognize this reality and break away from the JCPOA, and that parties must all work together toward making a deal with Iran that makes the world a safer and more peaceful place.
中方对此有何评论？
I wonder what is your opinion on that?
答：当前，中东局势紧张升级，伊核问题也面临严峻挑战。
Escalating tensions in the Middle East is posing grave challenges to the Iranian nuclear issue.
美国单方面退出伊核问题全面协议，无视国际法和国际义务，对伊进行极限施压，并阻挠其他方履约，这是伊核紧张局势的根源所在，也应该是各方客观公正处理伊核问题的基本出发点。
The US has unilaterally withdrawn from the JCPOA, ignored international law and its international obligations, imposed maximum pressure on Iran, and obstructed other parties in keeping their commitments. Such practices are the root cause of current tensions and should be the first thing for all parties to consider if we want to resolve the Iranian nuclear issue objectively and fairly.
全面协议来之不易，是业经安理会决议核可的多边外交重要成果，是国际核不扩散体系和中东地区和平稳定的重要支撑，是以国际法为基础的国际秩序的重要组成部分。
The hard-won JCPOA, endorsed and adopted by the UN Security Council, is an important outcome of multilateral diplomacy, an important pillar for the international non-proliferation system and peace and stability in the Middle East, and a significant part of the international order based on international law.
国际社会应从长远和大局出发，坚定维护全面协议，推动伊核及中东地区局势走向缓和。
The international community should have the bigger, long-term picture in mind, firmly uphold the JCPOA, and work for amelioration in the Iranian nuclear issue and in the Middle East.
中方将继续就此同有关各方保持密切沟通协调，为此作出不懈努力。
China will stay in close communication and coordination with relevant parties and make tireless efforts to this end.
问：当前中东局势紧张。
The situation in the Middle East is very strained now.
俄罗斯总统普京昨日结束了对土耳其和叙利亚的访问。
Yesterday Russian President Putin concluded his visit to Turkey and Syria.
请问中俄在和平解决中东海湾地区问题上的立场是否相近？
How close are the positions of Russia and China to the peaceful settlement in this region?
答：中方一直密切关注中东地区局势发展，也一直与包括俄方在内的有关各方保持着密切沟通。
China has been closely following the situation in the Middle East and been in close contact with Russia and other relevant sides.
你应该记得，不久前王毅国务委员兼外长同拉夫罗夫外长通电话，就当前海湾局势及双方在联合国安理会的合作全面地交换了意见，协调了立场。
As you may recall, State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi and Foreign Minister Lavrov discussed this on the phone just recently. They exchanged views and coordinated positions on the current situation in the Gulf region and collaboration in the UN Security Council.
中俄是全面战略协作伙伴，也都是联合国安理会常任理事国。双方对重大国际和地区问题有着相同或相近的立场，一直保持着密切沟通协调。
As comprehensive strategic partners of coordination and permanent members of the Security Council, China and Russia share the same or highly similar views and positions on major regional and international issues.
这种沟通协调也为复杂多变的国际形势注入了正能量和稳定性。
We keep frequent talks and coordination between us, which has been adding positive energy and stability to the international landscape that's complex and fluid.
中方愿继续与俄方加强战略沟通和战略协作，共同维护国际公平正义，共同维护地区和平稳定，为推动海湾局势降温，妥善应对当前事态发挥负责任和建设性作用。
China is ready to strengthen strategic communication and coordination with Russia, jointly uphold international justice and regional peace and stability, and play a responsible and constructive role in de-escalating tensions in the Gulf region and properly dealing with the current situation.
问：王毅国务委员兼外长已经结束了对埃及的访问。
State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi has just concluded his visit to Egypt.
你能否介绍此访具体成果？
Can you give us more details about the outcomes of this visit?
答：埃及是王毅国务委员此次非洲之行的第一站，充分体现了中方对中埃关系的高度重视。
Egypt was State Councilor Wang Yi's first stop during his visit to Africa this time, which shows how much we value China-Egypt relations.
访埃期间，王毅国务委员会见了塞西总统、马德布利总理，同舒克里外长会谈并举行两国外交部新一轮战略对话。
During this visit, State Councilor Wang Yi met with President Abdul Fatah Al-Sisi and Prime Minister Mostafa Kemal Madbouly, had talks with Foreign Minister Sameh Shoukry and held a new round of strategic dialogue between the two foreign ministries.
此访取得圆满成功，双方达成一系列重要共识。
The two sides reached important consensus during this successful visit.
一是推动双边关系迈上新台阶。
First, to bring bilateral relations to a new height.
近年来，在中埃领导人共同指引下，两国关系实现了跨越式发展，成为当今世界南南合作的典范。
Under the guidance of Chinese and Egyptian leaders in recent years, bilateral relations have achieved leapfrog development, becoming an exemplar of South-South cooperation.
双方同意朝着新时代构建命运共同体的目标，提升两国关系水平，推动中埃全面战略伙伴关系迈上新台阶，把中埃关系打造成为构建中非和中阿命运共同体的先行先试样板。
The two sides agreed to elevate the China-Egypt comprehensive strategic partnership to a higher level while working towards building a community with a shared future in a new era, and to make bilateral relations a pilot example for China-Africa and China-Arab communities with a shared future.
二是深化两国各领域务实合作。
Second, to deepen bilateral practical cooperation.
中埃共建“一带一路”早已结出丰硕成果。
Belt and Road cooperation between China and Egypt has delivered fruitful outcomes.
双方将深化“一带一路”倡议同埃及“2030愿景”的深度对接，开拓全方位互联互通合作，并通过新成立政府间合作委员会，统筹协调推进双边各领域合作。
The two sides will seek greater synergies between the BRI and Egypt's Vision 2030 and broaden all-round connectivity cooperation. A new inter-governmental cooperation committee will be set up to coordinate and advance cooperation.
双方还同意加快落实并推动中非合作论坛北京峰会成果在包括埃及在内的非洲各国落地生根，积极探索和拓展在非三方合作。
Both sides agreed to make sure that FOCAC Beijing Summit outcomes will take root in Egypt and other African countries with faster implementation efforts. We will also explore and expand third-party cooperation in Africa.
三是携手反对恐怖主义和极端主义。
Third, to fight terrorism and extremism together.
访问期间，双方同意深化反恐和去极端化交流，加强在国际合作中的沟通协作，为地区和国际反恐事业作出新的贡献。
During the visit, the two sides agreed to deepen exchange in counter-terrorism and de-radicalization, enhance communication and coordination in international cooperation, and make new contributions to regional and global counter-terrorism cause.
最后我想指出，中方始终把埃及放在中国同非洲和阿拉伯国家关系的重要位置。
And finally, I'd like to stress the importance China attaches to Egypt in its overall relations with Africa and Arab countries.
埃及是第一个与新中国建交的非洲和阿拉伯国家，新中国国家领导人首次出访非洲的第一站就是埃及。
Egypt was the first African country and the first Arab state that established diplomatic relations with the People's Republic of China. It was also the first stop of our leader's first visit to Africa after the PRC was founded.
无论我们走得多远，都不会忘记来时的路。
No matter how far we've come, we will never forget where we began.
在当前充满不确定性的国际形势下，中方愿同埃方一道，进一步深化战略协作，共同维护地区和平稳定，维护多边主义和公平正义，捍卫广大发展中国家的共同利益，为世界注入更多稳定性和正能量。
Amid the current international situation fraught with uncertainty, China stands ready to work with Egypt through deeper strategic coordination to uphold regional peace and stability, multilateralism, equity and justice, defend the common interests of developing countries, and add more stability and positive energy to the world.
问：美国国会议员周三呼吁特朗普政府对中方实施制裁，理由是中方对维吾尔族人犯下了“反人类罪”。
US lawmakers called on Wednesday for the Trump administration to impose sanctions on China because of what they describe as "crimes against humanity" against Uighur minority.
中方对此是否感到关切？是否就此与美方沟通？
Is China concerned by this move? Do you have any contact with the US side on this matter?
答：你说的是美国“国会—行政部门中国委员会”（CECC）的一份报告吧？这个所谓的“委员会”一直戴着“有色眼镜”，出于自己的政治目的，对中国进行无端指责，毫无客观性可言，也没有任何信誉。
You were talking about a CECC report, right? This so-called commission, which never fails to observe China through a distorted perspective, has long been engaging in groundless accusations against China out of political agenda. In this commission you'll find no objectivity or credibility whatsoever.
中国政府高度重视保护和促进人权。
The Chinese government attaches great importance to protecting and promoting human rights.
中国人权状况怎么样，中国人民最有发言权。
No one is in a better position to evaluate China's human rights condition than the Chinese people.
我们敦促美国有关方面多反省一下自己国内存在的人权问题，停止故意歪曲抹黑中国，停止采取损害中美互信与合作的言行。
We urge those in the US to spend more time reflecting on their human rights issues at home, and stop smearing China or jeopardizing mutual trust and cooperation through their words and deeds.
问：据报道，2名中国公民上周末因在佛罗里达州一处海军基地非法拍照而被捕。
Two Chinese nationals were arrested for illegally taking photos at a US Navy base in Florida last weekend.
中方能否证实并介绍相关情况？
Can you confirm it and do you have more information on that?
答：根据我目前了解的情况，中国驻美使领馆已经接到美方关于两名中国公民于4日被捕的通报，驻休斯敦总领馆已与当事人取得联系。
As far as I know, the Chinese diplomatic missions in the US have been informed by the US side of the arrest of two Chinese citizens on January 4. The Chinese Consulate-General in Houston has got in touch with them.
我们要求美方依法、公正调查，妥善处理此案，切实保障涉事中国公民的合法权益。
We ask the US side to carry out fair investigations in accordance with law, properly handle this case, and ensure the legitimate rights and interests of the Chinese nationals involved.
去年12月31日，我曾经在这里就类似的情况发出过提醒。
I offered some reminder over a similar case on December 31 last year.
考虑到春节将至，今天我们在这里再次提醒海外中国公民加强遵纪守法和自我保护意识，不要在军事禁区或其他敏感区域逗留或拍照，严格按照有关提示和标识行事。
Now that the Chinese Lunar New Year is around the corner, once again we want to remind our citizens overseas to raise awareness of law and self-protection, not to linger in or photograph restricted military areas or other sensitive places, and to strictly follow the signs and warnings nearby.
中国政府始终高度重视维护海外中国公民的安全与合法权益，一贯要求海外中国公民遵守当地法律法规，不从事任何违法活动。
The Chinese government attaches great importance to protecting the safety and legitimate rights and interests of Chinese citizens overseas. We ask them to observe laws and regulations of host countries and not to engage in any form of illegal activities.
中国驻外使领馆将继续在职责范围内为中国公民提供必要协助。
Chinese diplomatic missions will continue to provide necessary assistance to our citizens within their scope of duties.
问：8日，特朗普总统发表电视讲话，称美国正在评估如何应对伊朗对美军事基地的袭击，同时将立即对伊朗实施额外的惩罚性经济制裁。
On January 8, US President Trump said in a televised speech that as the US continues to evaluate options in response to Iranian aggression, it will immediately impose additional punishing economic sanctions on Iran.
美军事和装备强大，但并不意味着美必须使用。
He also said, "The fact that we have this great military and equipment, however, does not mean we have to use it."
中方对此有何评论？
I wonder what is China's comment on that?
答：我们对当前中东地区局势保持高度关注，也一直在呼吁有关各方保持克制。
We are closely following the situation in the Middle East and calling on relevant parties to exercise restraint.
确保中东海湾地区和平稳定，符合各方利益，对全世界都至关重要。
Peace and stability in the Gulf region and the Middle East must be ensured as it serves the interests of all countries and is of vital importance to the whole world.
中方一贯主张，在处理国家关系时，应当遵守《联合国宪章》宗旨和原则以及国际关系基本准则，应该通过对话、谈判等和平方式妥善解决彼此间的矛盾分歧。
China holds that in state-to-state relations, all countries should earnestly observe the purposes and principles of the UN Charter and the basic norms governing international relations, and resolve disputes properly through dialogue, negotiation and other peaceful means.
中方呼吁，各方尊重事情本身的是非曲直，坚持政治解决的大方向，以实际行动推动局势实现降温、走向缓和，共同维护海湾地区的和平与稳定。
We call on all sides to judge issues on their own merits, stick to political settlement, take concrete actions to cool off tensions, and make joint efforts to safeguard peace and stability in the Gulf region.
中方将继续秉持客观公正立场，为推动局势降温、妥善应对当前事态发挥负责任和建设性的作用。
China will continue to uphold an objective and fair position and play a responsible and constructive role in ameliorating the situation and properly dealing with the situation.
无论过去、现在还是未来，中国都始终是中东和平的建设者、中东稳定的促进者和中东发展的贡献者。
China has been and will continue to be a builder of peace, a promoter of stability and a contributor to the development in the Middle East.
2020年1月8日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on January 8, 2020
问：关于中国和印尼的问题。
Question on China and Indonesia.
印尼军方今天表示已向纳土纳群岛附近海域派遣战机和军舰。
Indonesia has deployed fighter jets and warships next to Natuna Islands in the South China Sea, which is what the Indonesian military said today.
中方对此有何回应？中方对纳土纳是否有领土声索？
Do you have any reaction to that and can you clarify if China has any claim on Natuna Islands?
答：我们已多次就近期海上事态作过表态，我们也多次表明，中国对南沙群岛拥有主权，对相关海域拥有主权权利和管辖权，这一立场符合国际法。
It has been several times recently that we responded to recent maritime developments in the South China Sea. We repeatedly and clearly stated that China has sovereignty over the Nansha Islands and sovereign rights and jurisdiction over the relevant waters. Our position is in accordance with international law.
我要强调，中国与印尼不存在领土主权争议，双方在南海部分海域存在海洋权益主张重叠。
I'd like to stress that China and Indonesia don't have disputes over territorial sovereignty. We have overlapping claims of maritime rights and interests in some areas in the South China Sea.
我们希望印尼方面保持冷静，愿同印尼方面继续妥善处理分歧，维护好两国关系和地区和平稳定大局。
China hopes Indonesia will remain calm. We would like to handle our differences with Indonesia in a proper way and uphold our bilateral relations as well as peace and stability in the region.
事实上，中国和印尼双方也一直通过外交渠道就此保持着沟通。
In fact, we have been in contact with each other on this issue through diplomatic channels.
问：今天，伊朗外长发推特称，伊朗根据《联合国宪章》第51条采取并结束了针对美基地的对等自卫措施。
Iranian foreign minister tweeted today, "Iran took and concluded proportionate measures in self-defense under Article 51 of UN Charter targeting base from which cowardly armed attack against our citizens and senior officials were launched.
伊朗不寻求局势升级或战争，但将保卫自己免受任何侵略。
We do not seek escalation or war, but will defend ourselves against any aggression."
中方对此有何评论？
What's your opinion about this?
答：当前中东地区形势复杂敏感。
Situation in the Middle East is complex and sensitive at the moment.
中方一直高度关注相关事态的发展，我们呼吁有关方面保持克制。中方一贯主张有关各方应该在相互尊重的基础上，通过对话、谈判等和平方式妥善解决彼此间的矛盾分歧，共同维护地区和平稳定。
China has been closely following the latest developments. We call on relevant sides to exercise restraint and believe that they should resolve disputes properly and peacefully through dialogue and negotiation on the basis of mutual respect, and jointly uphold regional peace and stability.
我们多次说过，中东地区的形势进一步恶化，不符合任何一方的利益，确保该地区的和平稳定，对全世界都至关重要。
Like we said repeatedly, worsening of tensions in the Middle East doesn't serve the interest of anyone. Ensuring peace and stability in the region is of vital importance to the whole world.
中方将继续密切关注形势的发展，同有关各方保持密切沟通，为推动局势尽快实现降温，妥善应对当前局势发展发挥负责任的作用。
China will continue to follow closely the situation, stay in close contact with the relevant sides, and play a responsible role in cooling off tensions and properly managing the situation.
问：对于伊朗称空袭美军基地系自卫，中方有何评论？
The Iranian side said their attacks on US military base were self-defense. What's China's opinion on that?
答：对于当前事态，中方感到忧虑。
China is concerned about the current situation.
我们一贯主张有关各方应该在相互尊重的基础上，通过对话、谈判等和平方式妥善解决彼此间的矛盾分歧，共同维护中东海湾地区的和平与稳定。
We believe the relevant sides should resolve differences properly and peacefully through dialogue and negotiations on the basis of mutual respect, and jointly uphold peace and stability of the Gulf region in the Middle East.
问：你在前几天的记者会上提到，中方将为维护中东海湾地区和平与安全发挥建设性作用。
You said the other day that China will play a constructive role in maintaining peace and security in the Middle East and the Gulf region.
请问这包含金融、经济方面的支持吗？
Does that include financial support?
答：如果你关注中国外交，密切跟踪形势发展的话，你应该注意到，在中东海湾局势发生急剧变化之后，杨洁篪主任、王毅国务委员兼外长第一时间同多位其他国家外交部长通话，就当前地区形势交换意见，呼吁各方保持冷静克制，推动事态尽快实现降温。
If you follow closely China's diplomacy and the latest situation, you should've noticed that after the sharp changes took place in the Middle East and the Gulf region, Director Yang Jiechi and State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi had phone calls with foreign ministers of some relevant countries at the earliest time possible to exchange views, calling for calmness and restraint for early de-escalation.
同时，中国作为联合国安理会常任理事国，也在安理会同有关方面保持着密切沟通，呼吁安理会承担起维护国际和平与安全的首要责任。
In the meantime, as a permanent member of the UN Security Council, China keeps close contact with relevant sides within the Security Council and calls on the Council to take up its primary responsibility of safeguarding international peace and security.
刚才我说过，对于当前事态，中方感到忧虑，我们呼吁各方能够保持克制。
As I said, China is concerned about the latest developments.
我们也希望各方能够通过对话、谈判等和平方式妥善解决彼此间分歧与矛盾。
We call on relevant sides to exercise restraint and properly resolve disputes through dialogue, negotiation and other peaceful means.
至于你提到的金融、经济方面的支持，我不知道指的是什么。但我可以告诉你，中国同中东海湾各国在各个领域，包括经贸、投资、基础设施建设等领域都保持着密切合作。
I'm not sure what you meant by "financial support", but I can tell you that China has close cooperation with countries in the Middle East and the Gulf region in trade, investment, infrastructure and other areas.
我们在“一带一路”框架下的合作卓有成效，也切实造福了中国和中东海湾各国人民。
Our cooperation under the BRI framework has been effective and beneficial to people in China and the Middle East region.
问：考虑到中东军事活动增加，中方是否会禁止民用飞机飞越伊朗、伊拉克空域？
Considering there have been more military activities in the Middle East, will China ban civil airplanes from flying over Iran and Iraq?
答：据我了解，中国民航主管部门正密切关注地区航空安全形势。
As I know, the Chinese authority in charge of civil aviation is closely following the situation of aviation security in that region.
具体情况可以向他们询问。
I'd refer you to them for more specifics.
中方对当前中东局势感到担忧，希望地区局势尽快降温，这符合国际社会的共同利益。
China is concerned about the current situation in the Middle East. We hope for early de-escalation, which will serve the common interests of the international community.
问：有伊拉克议员表示，如美方撤出伊拉克，中方可以在经济领域帮助伊拉克。
Some lawmakers in Iraq have suggested that China could help Iraq economically if the US withdraws from Iraq.
本周二，伊拉克国民议会副议长会见了中国驻伊拉克大使，表示希望执行年初双方达成的初步协议。
On Tuesday the deputy speaker of Iraq's parliament met with the Chinese ambassador and called for implementation of preliminary deals that were signed between the two countries early this year.
中方是否打算尽快实施有关协议或签署新的协议，以缓解地区局势？
I was wondering if China has any plans to implement the deals as soon as possible or to sign new deals in Iraq to ease the situation there?
答：我刚才说过，对于当前中东紧张局势，中方一直与有关各方保持着密切沟通。
As I said, China has been in close communication with relevant sides over current tensions in the Middle East.
的确，中国驻伊拉克大使近期会见了伊拉克政府高层以及议会负责人。
Indeed, the Chinese ambassador to Iraq recently met with high-level officials in the Iraqi government and parliament.
中国驻伊拉克使馆已经发布了消息，你可以查阅。
I'd refer you to the statement issued by our embassy for more details.
至于你刚才提到的一些具体协议、援助的情况，我不掌握。
As for some specific agreement or assistance, I'm not aware of that yet.
我可以告诉你的是，中国和伊拉克传统友好，两国在各领域一直保持着友好合作关系。
China and Iraq share a traditional friendship with cooperation across the board.
中方积极参与伊拉克重建，我们愿意继续为帮助伊拉克实现稳定与发展作出自己的贡献。
China has been actively helping Iraq in its reconstruction, and we will continue working for stability and development in Iraq.
问：不久前，澳大利亚智库洛伊国际政策研究所发布一份“全球外交指数”调查显示，随着中国近年新建交国数量增加，2019年中国驻外使领馆总数超过美国成为全球第一。
The recent Lowy Institute Global Diplomacy Index shows that in 2019 China has overtaken the United States as the country with the largest number of embassies and consulates across the world as more countries established diplomatic ties with it.
有媒体分析认为，中国驻外机构数量快速增加，反映了中国在国际舞台上日益增长的雄心。
Media analysis sees the rapid increase in China's diplomatic missions as a manifestation of its growing ambition on the international stage.
你有何评论？
What's your comment?
答：我也看到了这份报告。
I noted that report.
去年我们热烈庆祝了中华人民共和国成立70周年。
In 2019, we celebrated the 70th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China.
70年来，中国外交取得了跨越式发展。
Over the past seven decades, China's diplomacy has achieved leapfrog progress.
我们现在同180个国家建立了外交关系，同112个国家和国际组织建立了伙伴关系，参加了100多个政府间国际组织，签署了超过500多个多边条约，构建起全方位、多层次、立体化的外交布局。
We now have diplomatic relations with 180 countries and partnerships with 112 countries and international organizations. We have joined more than 100 inter-governmental organizations and signed over 500 multilateral treaties. An all-round, multi-tiered and all-dimensional foreign affairs architecture has been put in place.
根据我手头掌握的数据，改革开放40多年来，内地居民出境超过13.8亿人次。
Based on statistics at hand, in the past 40 years or so since reform and opening-up started, citizens in China's mainland have made more than 1.38 billion trips overseas.
目前，在海外的中国企业有近4万家，留学生约150万人，全年中国公民出境人次超过1.7亿。
Nearly 40,000 Chinese businesses have set up presence in other countries. At present, the number of Chinese students studying abroad stands around 1.5 million and there are more than 170 million outbound trips throughout a year.
因此，中国驻外使领馆数量增多、力量加强是必然的、必要的，也是必须的。
Therefore, a growing diplomatic infrastructure in keeping with China's development is a necessity and a must.
大就要有大的样子。
It is only natural to have things in proportion.
中国驻外使领馆的作用，是维护国家和人民的利益，发展同世界各国的友好合作关系，不是为了与谁去较量，跟谁去攀比。
The mission of Chinese diplomatic posts is to safeguard the interests of China and the Chinese people, and to nurture friendship and cooperation with other countries. We do not intend to compete with anyone in this regard.
我想强调，中国外交的宗旨是维护世界和平、促进共同发展。
I would like to stress that the purpose of China's diplomacy is to uphold world peace and promote common development.
新时代中国特色大国外交致力于推动建设新型国际关系，推动构建人类命运共同体。
Our major country diplomacy with Chinese characteristics in a new era aims to promote the building of a new type of international relations and a community with a shared future for mankind.
中国外交影响的显著提升和中国驻外使领馆的发展壮大对世界和平发展事业、对国际公平正义事业来说，都是件好事儿。
Greater influence of China's diplomacy and more Chinese diplomatic missions will contribute to the global cause of peace, development, equity and justice.
问：关于印尼的问题，你说中国与印尼不存在领土主权争议，这是否指中国对纳土纳群岛不存在领土声索？
I've got a follow-up question on Indonesia. You said there is no dispute between China and Indonesia over territorial sovereignty. Does that mean China has no territorial claim on Natuna Islands?
答：中国对南沙群岛拥有主权，对相关海域拥有主权权利和管辖权，这一立场符合国际法。
China has sovereignty over the Nansha Islands and sovereign rights and jurisdiction over the relevant waters. Our position is in accordance with international law.
中国和印尼不存在领土主权争议，但双方在南海部分海域存在海洋权益主张重叠。
In the meantime, I'd like to stress that China and Indonesia don't have disputes over territorial sovereignty, though we have overlapping claims of maritime rights and interests in some areas in the South China Sea.
我们愿同印尼方继续妥处分歧，维护好两国关系和地区和平稳定大局。
China would like to handle our differences with Indonesia in a proper way and uphold our bilateral relations as well as peace and stability in the region.
问：7日，美国国务卿蓬佩奥称中国共产党正在对被关押在新疆的少数民族穆斯林犯下大规模侵犯人权的罪行，美方要求所有国家，特别是伊斯兰合作组织和阿盟的国家，谴责中共对维吾尔族人的野蛮行径。
Secretary Pompeo said on January 7 that the Chinese Communist Party is committing mass human rights violations and abuses ethnic Muslim minorities held in detention in Xinjiang. The US asks all countries, particularly those in the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the Arab League, to denounce the Chinese Communist Party's brutal treatment of Uighurs.
此外，蓬佩奥还表示注意到中方任命了新的香港中联办主任，希望中共遵守在《中英联合声明》中的承诺，确保香港地区享有法治独立和自由。
He also noted the appointment of the new head of the Liaison Office of the Central People's Government in the Hong Kong SAR and hopes the Chinese Communist Party will honor its commitments in the Sino-British Joint Declaration to guarantee Hong Kong's independent rule of law and freedoms.
中方对此有何回应？
I wonder if you have a response to that?
答：美方个别人以其惯用的编造谎言的伎俩，再次攻击抹黑中国。
Certain individual on the US side, with his expertise in fabricating lies, once again slandered and attacked China.
这种做法不仅严重削弱美国自身的国际信誉，也遭到越来越多国家的质疑和抵制。
Practices like this have severely undermined America's credibility and have been questioned and rejected by more and more countries.
在此我要强调：
I would like to stress the following points.
中国新疆根本不存在美方所说的民族、宗教、人权问题。
There is no issue with ethnicity, religion or human rights in China's Xinjiang.
新疆地方政府依法采取的反恐和去极端化措施成功遏制了当地的暴恐活动，保障了新疆各族人民的安居乐业，受到2500万新疆各族民众的普遍支持，也得到包括穆斯林国家在内的国际社会的积极评价。
The counter-terrorism and de-radicalization measures taken by local governments in Xinjiang were lawful and effective as they contained terrorist activities and ensured the region's peace and prosperity. The endeavors have been endorsed by all 25 million residents of various ethnic groups there and commended by the international community including Muslim countries.
去年3月，伊斯兰合作组织外长理事会通过决议，赞赏中国关怀穆斯林群众所作的努力。
In March 2019, the Council of Foreign Ministers of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) adopted a resolution which commended China's efforts in providing care to Muslim citizens.
去年7月人权理事会和9月第74届联大三委会议期间，几十个国家代表积极评价中国在反恐和去极端化工作中尊重和保障人权，其中就包括不少伊斯兰合作组织的成员国。
During a UN Human Rights Council meeting in July and a Third Committee session of the 74th UNGA, dozens of countries, of which many are OIC members, applauded China's respect for and protection of human rights in its counter-terrorism and de-radicalization efforts.
必须指出的是，这些年来，美国对中东地区发动的战争造成了不计其数的穆斯林的伤亡，流离失所，造成地区局势的动荡不安。
It must be pointed out that the wars staged by the US in the Middle East over the past years have caused countless Muslim casualties and displacement as well as turmoils in the region.
事实证明，侵犯穆斯林人权的恰恰是美国。
As has been proven, it is precisely the US that has infringed upon Muslim human rights.
美国挑拨中国同广大伊斯兰国家关系是徒劳的。
Its attempts to sow discord between China and Islamic states are futile in the end.
关于香港事务，这纯属中国内政，任何外国政府、组织和个人都无权干预。
Hong Kong affairs are purely China's internal affairs. No country, organization or individual has any right to interfere.
香港回归以来，中方依照宪法和香港特区基本法管治香港，“一国两制”、“港人治港”、高度自治方针得到了切实贯彻落实，香港居民享有的各项权利、自由依法得到充分保障，这是国际社会公认的事实。
Since its return to the motherland, Hong Kong has been governed in accordance with China's Constitution and the Basic Law of the Hong Kong SAR. The principles of "one country, two systems" and Hong Kong people governing Hong Kong with a high degree of autonomy has been faithfully implemented. The rights and freedoms of Hong Kong residents have been fully guaranteed according to law. Those are facts already recognized by the international community.
包括美方在内的任何外部势力没有任何法律依据、也没有任何资格援引《中英联合声明》对香港事务说三道四。
The US and other foreign forces have no legal basis and are in no position to invoke the Sino-British Joint Declaration to make unwarranted remarks on Hong Kong affairs.
最后，美方个别人不敢面对中国特色社会主义制度取得的巨大成功，也不能接受中国共产党受到全体中国人民衷心拥护的事实，热衷于大搞意识形态对立，这与时代潮流完全相悖。
Certain individual in the US cannot accommodate himself to the huge success of socialism with Chinese characteristics or acknowledge the fact that the Communist Party of China has won the full support of the Chinese people. He has been obsessed with ideology confrontation that runs counter to the trend of the times.
我们奉劝个别人放弃对华的偏见和执念，尽快树立正确的“中国观”，停止喋喋不休的反华聒噪。
We advise him to discard anti-China prejudice and obsession, foster a correct perception on China as soon as possible and stop his anti-China rattling.
任何妄图挑拨中国共产党和中国人民关系、否定中国特色社会主义制度的政治图谋都注定不会得逞。
Political attempts are doomed to fail if they aim to drive a wedge between the CPC and the Chinese people or negate our socialism with Chinese characteristics.
问：据报道，一段时间以来，澳大利亚新南威尔士州、维多利亚州、南澳大利亚州等多地发生严重山火，过火面积超过600万公顷，已造成20多人死亡，2000多所房屋被毁，当地数以千计的民众被迫离开家园。
Severe bushfires have ravaged the Australian states of New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia. The blazes have scorched over 6 million hectares of land, killed more than 20 lives, burned down over 2,000 houses and displaced thousands of local residents.
答：我们注意到有关报道，对澳大利亚多地发生严重山火灾害并造成重大人员伤亡和财产损失表示诚挚慰问。
We noted media reports on that, and we express our sincere sympathies to Australia for the heavy casualties and property losses caused by severe bushfires in many areas.
问：中国是否计划停飞波音飞机？
Is China planning to ground Boeing planes?
答：为什么？有什么新的消息吗？
Why? Is there anything that comes up?
（记者：我只是问一下）
Follow-up: Just a question.
我手里掌握的材料是：2019年12月12日，中国民用航空局曾召开新闻发布会，就波音737MAX软件更新及解禁期限等问题作出回应。
According to the information I have, the Civil Aviation Administration of China responded to questions on the software update of and when to lift ban on Boeing 737 MAX in a press conference it held on December 12, 2019.
有关报道在网上可以查阅，我这里没有进一步的消息可以补充。
You may read the press release online. I have nothing to update you at the moment.
问：我们注意到，正在中国访问的老挝总理通伦昨天前往梁家河参访。
We noted that Lao Prime Minister Thongloun Sisoulith visited Liangjiahe Village yesterday.
请问通伦总理是否是首位到访梁家河村的外国领导人？此访具有什么特殊意义？
Is Prime Minister Sisoulith the first foreign leader that visited Liangjiahe Village? What is the significance of his visit?
答：的确，昨天，老挝总理通伦访问了中国陕西省。在此期间，他走访了梁家河，这里是中国国家主席习近平曾经工作生活过的地方。
Indeed, Prime Minister Sisoulith visited Shaanxi Province yesterday, during which he made a stop at Liangjiahe Village, a place where President Xi Jinping used to work and live.
本周一，通伦总理在北京同习近平主席会见时就表示，中国坚持和完善中国特色社会主义制度，值得老挝学习、借鉴，也鼓舞老挝继续坚定沿着社会主义道路走下去。
During his meeting with President Xi Jinping on Monday in Beijing, Prime Minister Sisoulith said that Laos has something to learn from China's adherence to and improvement of socialism with Chinese characteristics, which also encourages Laos to stay committed to the path of socialism.
我们相信，通伦总理通过访问陕西省、通过走访梁家河，一定能够进一步了解中国领导人当年艰苦奋斗的宝贵经历，感受中国人民改革创新的饱满干劲，体会中国特色社会主义制度的深厚基础。
We believe that through his visit to Shaanxi Province and Liangjiahe Village, Prime Minister Sisoulith will better understand how Chinese leaders have gone through struggles amid difficulties, feel the energy of the Chinese people in pushing forward reform and innovation, and have a better idea of the solid foundation on which the socialist system with Chinese characteristics is based.
事实上，通伦总理并非首位参访梁家河的外国领导人。
In fact, Prime Minister Sisoulith is not the first leader that visited Liangjiahe Village.
根据我掌握的情况，近年来，中非总统图瓦德拉、尼泊尔前总理普拉昌达、新加坡前副总理张志贤等外国政要都先后去过梁家河，也都对当地在扶贫帮困、经济建设、生态治理等领域取得的成就表示高度赞赏。
In recent years, President Touadéra of Central Africa, former Prime Minister Prachanda of Nepal and former Deputy Prime Minister Teo Chee Hean of Singapore have all been to Liangjiahe and spoken highly of the local achievements in poverty alleviation, economic development and ecological conservation.
2015年习近平主席访问美国期间，曾经以梁家河为例向世界介绍中国改革开放以来的发展历程。
President Xi Jinping cited the development of Liangjiahe as an example to illustrate China's reform and opening-up endeavor during his visit to the US in 2015.
梁家河是中国改革开放的缩影，是中国脱贫攻坚的写照，也是中国梦的发祥之地。
For the Chinese people, Liangjiahe is the epitome of China's efforts to eliminate poverty, to advance reform and opening-up and to pursue the Chinese dream.
我们欢迎更多的外国人士走近中国，特别是走进梁家河这样的中国基层，去倾听中国普通百姓的真实心声，去感知中国奋勇向前的强劲脉搏，去读懂中国持续发展的内在逻辑。
We welcome more foreign friends visiting China, especially such grassroots localities as Liangjiahe, to hear the voices of our people, to feel the strong pulse of China's growth, and to understand how China has achieved sustained development.
我们愿意与世界各国共同探讨促进发展这一时代命题，加强治国理政经验的交流互鉴，共同推动构建人类命运共同体。
We would like to discuss development with all countries, enhance our exchange on state governance, and jointly advance the building of a community with a shared future for mankind.
问：今天，我们看到中国防务领域企业的股票上涨。
We saw that the stock prices of Chinese defense enterprises have gone up today.
请问，中方在中东局势中发挥“建设性作用”是不是指在防务方面？
I wonder if by "a constructive role" you meant a role in defense in the Middle East? I'm afraid this is not a question for me as a foreign ministry spokesperson.
答：关于股票的问题，你不应该来问我，建议你向证监会询问。我不是股票方面的专家。
I'll leave that to the Chinese Securities Regulatory Commission since I'm no expert in the stock market.
问：据伊朗媒体报道，1月8日晨，乌克兰航空公司一架波音737客机在伊朗德黑兰霍梅尼国际机场起飞后不久坠毁，机上180人全部遇难，事故原因正在调查之中。
According to Iranian media, on the morning of January 8, a Ukraine International Airlines passenger jet, which is a Boeing 737, crashed shortly after taking off from Imam Khomeini International Airport at Tehran, Iran, killing all 180 people on board. The cause of the accident is still under investigation.
中方对此有何评论？
Do you have any comment on it?
答：我们看到有关报道，中方向遇难者表示沉痛哀悼，向遇难者家属表示深切慰问。
We noted media reports on that. We express deep condolences for the victims and extend sincere sympathy to the bereaved families.
我们希望有关方面尽快查清事故原因。
We hope relevant authorities will identify the cause as soon as possible.
事故发生后，中国驻乌克兰使领馆已联系乌有关部门核实情况。
After the accident, Chinese diplomatic missions in Ukraine contacted relevant authorities for verification.
目前，尚未收到中国公民乘坐此次航班的通报。
So far we haven't received notification of any Chinese passengers on board.
如有进一步消息，我们会及时发布。
If there's more information, we will let you know in due course.
问：考虑到美伊紧张局势升级，中方是否已经或计划从中东海湾地区撤侨？
Given increased tensions between Iran and the US, has China pulled any citizens out from the Middle East and the Gulf region? And do you plan to do so?
答：我不知道你有没有注意到，中国外交部和中国驻伊朗大使馆刚刚发布了安全提醒，提醒在伊朗的中国公民和机构密切关注地区安全形势，提高警惕，注意安全防范。
Perhaps you've noticed that the Chinese Foreign Ministry and the Chinese Embassy in Iran just issued a security alert, reminding Chinese citizens and institutions in Iran to pay close attention to the regional security situation, remain vigilant and take precautionary measures.
如遇到危险或突发情况，及时报警并与中国驻伊朗大使馆联系。
Our citizens are advised to call the police and contact the Chinese embassy in Iran when there's danger or emergency.
我要重申，中国政府始终高度重视海外中国公民的安全与合法权益，外交部和驻相关国家使领馆将继续密切关注当地局势，根据需要和具体情况决定是否发布相应级别的安全提醒。
I would like to reiterate that the Chinese government highly values the safety and legitimate rights and interests of Chinese citizens overseas. Our Foreign Ministry and diplomatic missions will continue to closely follow the situation on the ground and decide whether to issue security alerts of corresponding severity levels in light of needs and realities.
问：有一个关于利比亚的问题。
My question is about Libya.
昨天欧盟外交与安全政策高级代表与德国、意大利外长会晤后谴责土耳其向利比亚派兵的计划。
Yesterday EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and foreign ministers of Germany and Italy condemned Turkey's plan to send troops to Libya after their meeting in Brussels.
答：中方高度关注利比亚局势发展。
China closely follows the developments in Libya.
利比亚冲突持续，不仅利比亚人民遭受苦难，也影响整个地区的和平与安宁。
The ongoing conflicts in Libya have not only incurred sufferings of the Libyan people, but also undermined the peace and tranquility of the entire region.
中方一贯尊重利比亚主权独立和领土完整，始终认为利比亚问题应通过政治途径解决。
China respects Libya's sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity. We believe the Libyan issue should be resolved through political means.
当务之急，有关各方应从利比亚人民的根本利益和地区和平稳定大局出发，努力推动利冲突双方立即停火止暴，回到对话谈判的正确轨道上来，避免采取使局势进一步复杂化的行动。
At this moment, it is all the more important for all relevant parties to bear in mind the fundamental interests of the Libyan people as well as peace and stability in the region. They need to work for an immediate ceasefire and cessation of violence between the conflicting parties, return to the right track of dialogue and negotiation, and avoid taking actions that may further complicate the situation.
今天是“外交部发言人办公室”微信公众号上线两周年。
Today it has been exactly two years since we opened the MFA Spokesperson's WeChat account.
在此，我向长期关注、支持“外交部发言人办公室”微信、微博、抖音账号的朋友们、“发小”们表示衷心感谢。
Taking this occasion, I'd like to express heartfelt thanks to all the friends who have been following and supporting us on WeChat, Weibo and Douyin.
从今天起到14号，我们在微信、微博两个平台同步推出“发小有问我有答”的活动，欢迎大家关注，期待大家参与。
Starting from today to January 14th, an interactive activity called "Q&A about the MFA" will be there for you on both WeChat and Weibo. Look forward to your participation.
2020年1月7日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on January 7, 2020
问：我们注意到，基里巴斯总统马茂正在中国进行访问。
We understand President Maamau of Kiribati is visiting China.
中国领导人昨天同马茂总统举行了会谈会见。
Chinese leaders met and held talks with him yesterday.
你能否进一步介绍有关情况？中基双方就两国关系发展达成了哪些具体共识？
Could you share more information? What concrete consensus have the two sides reached on growing bilateral relations?
答：去年9月，基里巴斯同中国恢复外交关系，成为中国建交国朋友圈中的第180位新成员，也是中国同太平洋岛国合作大家庭中的第10位新伙伴。
In September 2019, Kiribati resumed diplomatic relations with China, making it the 180th country that have diplomatic ties with China and the 10th Pacific island nation to join China-Pacific islands cooperation.
新年伊始，马茂总统如期而至对中国进行国事访问，这也是今年中方接待的首场国事访问。
President Maamau is paying a state visit to China at the beginning of the year as agreed previously, which is also the first state visit China has received in 2020.
昨天，习近平主席、李克强总理分别同马茂总统举行了会谈会见。
Yesterday, President Xi Jinping and Premier Li Keqiang met and held talks with him respectively.
中基两国领导人深入沟通，为中基关系发展规划了美好蓝图。
Leaders of the two sides had in-depth exchange and blueprinted development of China-Kiribati relations.
概括来讲，双方主要达成以下三方面重要共识：
Important consensus was reached in the following three aspects:
第一，进一步深化政治互信。
First, to deepen political mutual trust.
马茂总统表示，基方出于对中国的信任和信心，作出了同中华人民共和国复交的重大决定，基方将坚定奉行一个中国原则。
President Maamau said, Kiribati made the major decision to resume diplomatic ties with China based on its trust and confidence in China. It will stay committed to the one-China principle.
中方表示，尊重基方自主选择符合自身国情的发展道路，愿同基方加强高层和各级别交往，分享治国理政经验。
The Chinese side expressed respect for Kiribati's independent choice of its development path in keeping with national realities, and its readiness to enhance exchange at all levels to share experience in state governance.
双方还同意在联合国、太平洋岛国论坛等多边机制内加强沟通合作，在南南合作框架内共同应对气候变化等挑战，维护发展中国家共同利益。
The two sides also agreed to strengthen communication and cooperation in such multilateral fora as the UN and the Pacific Islands Forum, and to jointly address challenges like climate change under the South-South cooperation framework to safeguard the common interests of developing countries.
第二，进一步拓展务实合作。
Second, to expand practical cooperation.
复交以来，中基双方各领域合作蓬勃开展，取得不少早期收获。
Since the resumption of diplomatic ties, China-Kiribati cooperation in various sectors has been booming with fruitful "early harvests".
此次双方签署了共建“一带一路”谅解备忘录等文件，将共建“一带一路”倡议同“基里巴斯20年发展规划”相对接，为双方加强合作提供了平台和指引。
The MOU on Belt and Road cooperation signed during this visit will synergize BRI cooperation and the Kiribati 20-year Vision (KV20), supporting and planning for stronger bilateral cooperation.
双方同意加强在经贸、农渔业、基建等领域的合作与交流，共同实现可持续发展与繁荣。
The two sides agreed to step up cooperation and exchange in sectors like trade, agriculture, fishery and infrastructure for sustainable development and common prosperity.
第三，进一步密切人文交流。
Third, to advance people-to-people and cultural exchange.
双方都同意加强人文交流与地方合作，在辽阔的太平洋上架起相互了解、增进友谊的桥梁。
The two sides agreed to strengthen people-to-people and cultural exchange and sub-national cooperation, which will serve as a bridge of mutual understanding and friendship across the vast Pacific ocean.
基里巴斯是世界上唯一纵跨赤道而且横越国际日期变更线的国家，也是最早迎来新年的国家之一，旅游资源得天独厚。
Kiribati is the only country in the world straddling the Equator and the International Date Line. It is also one of the earliest places to embrace the dawn of a new year.
中方已批准基里巴斯为中国公民组团出境旅游目的地国，相信未来将有更多中国游客前往领略基里巴斯的美景。
China has listed Kiribati, a country endowed with unique tourism resources, on its outbound group tour destinations. I'm sure more Chinese tourists will travel there to enjoy the beautiful sights.
事实证明，中基复交符合两国人民的共同利益。
Facts have shown that the resumption of diplomatic ties serves the interests of both China and Kiribati.
我们相信，中基关系在未来将延续快速发展势头，结出更多更丰硕的成果，迎来共同发展繁荣的美好明天！
We are confident that our bilateral relationship will retain the momentum of rapid growth and yield more fruitful outcomes in a bright future of shared development and prosperity.
问：关于中美经贸磋商的问题。
A question on the China-US trade talks.
有报道称，刘鹤副总理将率经贸代表团于1月13日赴华盛顿同美方签署第一阶段经贸协议。
According to reports, Vice Premier Liu He, as head of the Chinese delegation, will travel to Washington on January 13 to sign a phase one deal with the US.
答：关于中美经贸磋商的具体安排，建议你向商务部询问。
I'd refer you to the Ministry of Commerce for details of China-US trade talks.
问：据报道，美国拒绝为伊朗外长扎里夫赴纽约参加周四举行的联合国安理会会议发放签证。
The United States has denied Iranian Foreign Minister Zarif's visa that would allow him to attend a Security Council meeting on Thursday in New York.
中方对此有何评论？
I wonder if you have any comment on this?
答：为各国出席联合国会议的代表提供签证等便利，是美国作为联合国东道国承担的国际义务。
As the host of the United Nations headquarters, the US has a due international obligation to issue visas and provide other kinds of convenience for foreign representatives attending UN meetings.
中方敦促美国切实履行东道国义务，为相关国家有关公务人员参加联合国会议提供便利。
We urge the US to earnestly fulfill this obligation and offer convenience to member states representatives to attend UN meetings.
问：第一个问题，今年是中国和印尼建交70周年。
This year is the 70th anniversary of China-Indonesia diplomatic relations.
双方将如何庆祝？亮点是什么？
How is the preparation for the celebration? What will be the highlight?
第二个问题，中印尼领导人今年是否会在中国或印尼举行会晤？第三个问题，近期发生在纳土纳群岛海域的事件，是否会影响双方庆祝建交70周年活动的筹备工作？
Second question, will there be a summit meeting in China or in Indonesia? Last question, does the current issue of Natuna affect the preparation of celebration?
答：印尼是最早同新中国建交的国家之一，今年是中国印尼建交70周年。
Indonesia was among the first group of countries that established diplomatic relations with the People's Republic of China. This year marks the 70th anniversary of diplomatic ties between China and Indonesia, which is also an important year of national development in both countries.
同时，今年也是两国各自国家建设进程中的重要年份。两国对此均高度重视，一致同意举办一系列庆祝活动，进一步密切双方在各领域交往与合作，推动双边关系迈上一个新台阶，为两国和地区共同发展注入正能量。
We both attach high importance to this and have agreed to hold a series of celebratory activities to promote exchange and cooperation, bring bilateral relations to a new height and inject positive energy into both countries and the region.
作为全面战略伙伴，中国印尼合作领域广泛，潜力很大。
As comprehensive strategic partners, China and Indonesia enjoy broad cooperation with great potential.
只要双方心往一处想，劲往一处使，两国关系在建交70周年之际一定能呈现更多增长点，取得更大发展。
As long as we make joint efforts towards the same goal, we will achieve greater development with new growth areas in bilateral relations as we mark the 70th anniversary of diplomatic relations.
这里我要特别强调的是，中国印尼两国共建“一带一路”合作卓有成效，为两国人民带来了实实在在的利益。
I would like to stress in particular that effective China-Indonesia cooperation under the BRI has brought tangible benefits to both peoples.
中方愿同印尼方共同努力，持续深化两国在“一带一路”框架下的合作。
China stands ready to work with Indonesia to further deepen BRI cooperation.
关于你关心的两国领导人会晤的问题，我可以告诉你的是，高层交往一直是中国印尼两国关系的重要组成部分，中方正同印尼方就有关安排保持沟通。
As to meeting between the two sides' leaders that you are interested in, I would like to say that high-level exchange has always been an important part of China-Indonesia relations. The two sides are in communication regarding relevant arrangements.
你还提到了近期海上的一些事态，我可以告诉你的是，中国和印尼一直在通过外交渠道就此进行沟通。
Regarding some recent maritime developments you asked about, China and Indonesia have been in communication with each other through diplomatic channels.
中国和印尼作为全面战略伙伴，友好合作是大局、是主流，分歧是局部、是支流。
China and Indonesia are comprehensive strategic partners. Between us, friendship and cooperation is the mainstream while difference merely a branch.
作为南海沿岸国和地区大国，两国都肩负维护地区和平稳定的重任。
As littoral countries of the South China Sea and major countries in the region, both China and Indonesia shoulder the important task of safeguarding regional peace and stability.
中方始终从战略高度、以长远眼光看待中国和印尼的关系，我们相信印尼方也能以双边关系和地区稳定大局为重，同中方妥处分歧，为今年两国庆祝建交70周年创造适宜的氛围和良好的条件。
China always views bilateral relationship with Indonesia from a strategic and long-term perspective. We believe Indonesia will also bear in mind the bigger picture of bilateral relations and regional stability, properly resolve differences with China, and foster favorable atmosphere and conditions for celebrating the 70th anniversary of our diplomatic ties.
问：据报道，中巴自贸协定第二阶段议定书于近期生效，有关关税减让措施已于2020年1月1日开始实施。
The second phase of Pakistan-China Free Trade Agreement has recently come into effect, with tariff reduction measures effective since January 1.
你能否进一步介绍有关情况？
Do you have more details to share with us?
答：《中华人民共和国和巴基斯坦伊斯兰共和国关于修订<自由贸易协定>的议定书》已于2019年12月1日正式生效。
The Amending Protocol to the Free Trade Agreement between China and Pakistan entered into force on December 1, 2019.
《议定书》对原自贸协定中的货物贸易市场准入及关税减让表、原产地规则、贸易救济、投资等内容进行了升级和修订，并新增了海关合作章节。
The Protocol upgraded and revised the contents of the original free trade agreement on market access for trade in goods and tariff reduction schedules, rules of origin, trade remedies and investment. And it added a new chapter on customs cooperation.
其中，核心内容是在原自贸协定基础上，大幅提高货物贸易自由化水平。
Among them, the core content is to substantially increase the level of liberalization of trade in goods based on the original free trade agreement.
《议定书》规定，中巴两国间相互实施零关税产品的税目数比例将从此前的35%逐步增加至75%。
The Protocol stipulates that the proportion of tariff lines with zero-tariff products will gradually increase from 35% to 75%.
此外，双方还对占各自税目数比例5%的其他产品实施20%幅度的部分降税。
In addition, we will also have a 20% reduction in tariffs on other products that account for 5% of their respective tariff lines.
有关关税减让措施已于2020年1月1日起开始实施。
The tariff reduction measures came into effect on January 1, 2020.
中巴是全天候战略合作伙伴，两国关系发展势头良好。
China and Pakistan are all-weather strategic cooperative partners, and bilateral relations have been growing with a sound momentum.
中方愿同巴方一道，不断巩固政治互信，进一步深化包括贸易和投资在内的全方位合作，推动中巴经济走廊高质量发展，为两国和两国人民带来更多福祉。
China stands ready to work with Pakistan to consolidate political mutual trust, strengthen all-around cooperation including trade and investment, pursue high-quality development of the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor, and deliver more benefits to both countries and peoples.
问：印尼总统佐科昨天表示，他将向南海派遣渔船，加入已在相关海域执行任务的海军舰船。
Indonesian President Joko Widodo yesterday said he would mobilize fishing vessels to join naval vessels in the South China Sea.
佐科同时称，主权问题不容谈判。
He also said there would be no negotiating on matters of sovereignty.
你刚才说中国印尼间一直通过外交渠道就此进行沟通，有关沟通是在佐科发表上述言论后进行的吗？你对当前海上事态有何评论？
As you said there were diplomatic channels open, have they been open since he made this comment yesterday? And any specific comment about the situation that's unfolding there?
答：我刚才说过了，对于近期海上的一些事态，中国和印尼一直在通过外交渠道进行沟通。
Like I said, regarding some recent maritime developments, China and Indonesia have been in communication with each other through diplomatic channels.
我刚才也说过，中国和印尼作为全面战略伙伴，友好合作是大局、是主流，分歧是局部、是支流。
China and Indonesia are comprehensive strategic partners. Between us, friendship and cooperation is the mainstream while difference merely a branch.
问：据报道，伊朗议会通过动议，将美军列为恐怖组织。
The Iranian parliament has voted to designate US military as terrorist entities.
中方对此有何评论？
I wonder if China has any comment on the latest development in the Middle East?
答：中方对当前中东事态高度关切。
China is highly concerned about the current situation in the Middle East.
海湾地区局势进一步恶化不符合任何一方的利益，确保该地区的和平稳定，对全世界都至关重要。
Worsening of tensions in the Gulf region doesn't serve the interest of anyone. Ensuring peace and stability in the region is of vital importance to the whole world.
中方始终主张各方应切实遵守《联合国宪章》宗旨和原则以及国际关系基本准则，各国的独立、主权和领土完整应当得到尊重，中东海湾地区的和平稳定应当得到维护。
China holds that all sides should earnestly abide by the purposes and principles of the UN Charter and the basic norms governing international relations. All countries' independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity should be respected. Peace and stability in the Middle East and the Gulf region should be upheld.
我们敦促美方不要滥用武力。
We urge the US not to abuse force.
同时，我们也呼吁有关各方都能保持克制，避免事态轮番升级，尽快回到对话协商的轨道上来，推动紧张局势尽快实现降温。
Meanwhile, we call on relevant parties to exercise restraint to prevent a spiral of escalation. Dialogue and consultation should be resumed to cool off tensions as soon as possible.
问：据报道，中俄双方阻止安理会发表有关谴责对美驻伊拉克使馆袭击的主席新闻谈话。俄常驻联合国代表就此表示，不可能不将美方杀害苏莱曼尼一事考虑在内。
Russia and China decided to block the UN Security Council statement on condemning the attack on the US Embassy in Baghdad, as Russian ambassador said that because it would be impossible not to take into account the US killing Soleimani.
中方是否认为安理会应就苏莱曼尼遇袭身亡一事发表主席新闻谈话？
I wonder if China thinks there should be another statement at the Security Council about the killing of Soleimani?
答：伊朗常驻联合国代表已经就有关问题致函安理会主席和联合国秘书长。
The Iranian permanent representative to the UN sent letters on the relevant issue to the Security Council president and the Secretary-General.
我们认为，安理会负有维护国际和平与安全的首要责任，应当切实承担起《联合国宪章》赋予的职责。
As the Security Council has the primary responsibility to uphold international peace and security, it should earnestly fulfill its duties enshrined in the UN Charter.
中方作为安理会常任理事国，将继续秉持客观公正立场，同有关各方一道，共同维护国际法和国际公平正义，维护中东海湾地区的和平与安全。
As a permanent member of the Security Council, China will, in an objective and fair spirit, continue to work with other parties to uphold international law, international justice as well as peace and security in the Middle East and the Gulf region .
在此过程中，中方将同俄方，我们的全面战略协作伙伴，以及安理会其他成员保持密切沟通。
In the meantime, we will keep in close contact with Russia - China's comprehensive strategic partner of coordination - and other Security Council members.
2020年1月6日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on January 6, 2020
问：当前美伊矛盾升级。
Tensions in US-Iran relations are escalating.
美方称，如果伊朗袭击任何美公民或资产，美方将对伊朗52个目标实施打击。
The US claimed it has targeted 52 Iranian sites, which will be hit if Iran strikes any Americans or American assets.
伊朗方面称，美在地区大约35个目标均在伊打击范围内。
Iran said some 35 US targets in the region are within reach.
中方如何看待当前事态？
How does China see the current situation?
中东海湾地区局势进一步恶化，是任何人都不愿看到的。
Worsening of tensions in the Middle East and the Gulf region is the last thing anyone wants to see.
确保该地区和平稳定，对全世界都至关重要。
Ensuring peace and stability in the region is of vital importance to the whole world.
强权政治不得人心，不可持续。
Power politics is always resented and short-lived.
美方日前的军事冒险行为，违背国际关系基本准则，加剧地区局势的紧张动荡。
The US military adventurism goes against basic norms governing international relations and aggravates tensions and turbulence in the region.
中方一贯反对在国际关系中使用武力，军事手段没有出路，极限施压根本行不通。
China consistently opposes the use of force in international relations. Military actions will lead nowhere, nor will maximum pressure.
中方主张，各方应切实遵守《联合国宪章》宗旨和原则以及国际关系基本准则，各国的独立、主权和领土完整应当得到尊重，中东海湾地区的和平稳定应当得到维护。
China holds that all sides should earnestly abide by the purposes and principles of the UN Charter and the basic norms governing international relations. All countries' independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity should be respected. Peace and stability in the Middle East and the Gulf region should be upheld.
我们敦促美方不要滥用武力，呼吁有关各方保持克制，避免事态轮番升级，尽快回到对话协商的轨道上来，推动紧张局势实现降温。
We urge the US not to abuse force and call on relevant parties to exercise restraint to prevent a spiral of escalation. Efforts should be made to resume dialogue and consultation as soon as possible to cool off tensions.
中方将继续秉持客观公正立场，为维护中东海湾地区的和平与安全发挥建设性作用。
China will continue to uphold an objective and just position and play a constructive role in maintaining peace and security in the Middle East and the Gulf region.
问：跟进一个有关伊拉克和美国的问题。
A follow-up question on Iraq and US situation.
伊拉克国民议会通过决议，要求政府结束外国驻军在伊存在，美国总统特朗普周日表示，将对伊严厉制裁，他在推特中说，“如果我们不是在友好的基础上离开，我们将对他们实施前所未有的制裁。”
US President Trump on Sunday threatened to impose harsh sanctions on Iraq after the country's parliament passed a resolution, urging the government to expel foreign troops from the country. "If they do ask us to leave, if we don't do it in a very friendly basis, we will charge them sanctions like they've never seen before ever." Trump tweeted.
中方对此有何评论？
I wonder what the Chinese government thinks about it?
答：我们看到了有关报道。
We saw the reports.
中方一向认为，处理国家关系时，应遵守《联合国宪章》宗旨和原则以及国际关系基本准则。
In state-to-state relations, countries need to observe the purposes and principles of the UN Charter as well as the basic norms governing international relations.
中方一贯反对在国际关系中动辄使用或威胁使用制裁，更反对对一国实施单边制裁。
We oppose the arbitrary use or threat of sanction, not to mention the imposition of unilateral sanctions.
我们一贯主张，伊拉克的独立、主权和领土完整应该得到切实维护。
Iraq's independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity should be earnestly safeguarded.
我们希望有关国家特别是域外大国能够多做促进中东地区和平稳定的事，避免采取可能使地区局势紧张升级的举措。
We hope relevant countries, certain non-regional major country in particular, will contribute to peace and stability instead of escalating tensions in the Middle East.
问：周日，伊朗宣布了减少履行伊核全面协议承诺的最新措施。
Iran announced on Sunday a new rollback of it commitments to the JCPOA.
中方是否对此感到担忧？认为谁应为此负责？伊朗还是美国？
Is China concerned about this move? Who do you think should be held responsible, Iran or the US?
答：中方注意到伊朗方面宣布第五阶段减少履行伊核全面协议的举措，也注意到伊方表示这是最后一次减少履约，伊方将继续与国际原子能机构保持合作，并在一定条件下恢复履约。
China noted Iran's announcement of taking the fifth step to cut its JCPOA commitments. As we also noted, according to Iran, that would be its last step to reduce commitments. Iran will continue its cooperation with the IAEA and resume its compliance with the deal under certain circumstances.
我们认为，伊方虽然由于外部因素被迫减少履约，但同时也展示了克制态度，明确表达完整、有效执行全面协议的政治意愿，没有违反《不扩散核武器条约》规定的义务。
We believe that despite its reduction in commitments due to external reasons, Iran has demonstrated a restrained attitude and its political will to implement the JCPOA effectively and in full. It has not violated its obligations under the NPT.
当前，中东局势复杂性上升，全面协议面临严峻挑战。
At present, the situation in the Middle East is becoming more complex, posing grave challenges to the JCPOA.
美国单方面退出全面协议，无视国际法和国际义务，对伊朗进行极限施压，并阻挠其他方面履约，这是伊核紧张局势的根源所在，也应该是各方客观公正处理伊核问题的基本出发点。
The US has unilaterally withdrawn from the JCPOA, ignored international law and its international obligations, imposed maximum pressure on Iran, and obstructed other parties in keeping their commitments. Such practices are the root cause of current tensions and should be the first thing for all parties to consider if we want to resolve the Iranian nuclear issue objectively and fairly.
所有全面协议参与方均应保持冷静、理性，坚持政治外交解决的正确方向，坚持在全面协议联委会框架内协商解决履约分歧，排除干扰，避免采取任何可能导致局势进一步复杂化的举措，全力维护好全面协议。
All parties to the JCPOA should remain calm and rational, stick to the right direction of a political and diplomatic settlement, resolve differences on the implementation of the deal through consultations under the JCPOA Joint Commission, stay focused, avoid taking any measure that may complicate the situation, and strive to preserve the JCPOA.
最后，我想强调，全面协议来之不易，是业经安理会决议核可的多边外交的重要成果，是国际核不扩散体系和中东地区和平稳定的重要支撑，是以国际法为基础的国际秩序的重要组成部分。
I want to stress that the hard-won JCPOA, endorsed and adopted by the UN Security Council, is an important outcome of multilateral diplomacy, an important pillar for the international non-proliferation system and peace and stability in the Middle East, and a significant part of the international order based on international law.
国际社会应从长远和大局出发，坚定维护全面协议，推动伊核及中东地区局势走向缓和。
The international community should have the bigger, long-term picture in mind, firmly uphold the JCPOA, and work for amelioration in the Iranian nuclear issue and the situation in the Middle East.
中方将继续就此同有关各方保持密切的沟通协调，为此作出不懈努力。
China will continue to remain in close communication and coordination with relevant parties and make tireless efforts to this end.
问：伊朗外交部发言人昨日表示，伊朗已就苏莱曼尼遇袭身亡一事致函联合国安理会。
Yesterday Iranian Foreign Ministry spokesperson said that Iran has appealed to the UN Security Council over the assassination of commander Soleimani.
伊朗外交部表示，已采取包括在安理会层面在内的政治、法律等多种应对措施。
He said that the Foreign Ministry already initiated political, legal and other measures including at the level of the UN Security Council.
中方是否认为此事应在安理会进行讨论？
I wonder if China thinks this issue should be brought to the Security Council?
答：中方注意到伊朗常驻联合国代表已致函安理会主席和联合国秘书长。
China noted that the Iranian permanent representative to the UN sent letters to the Security Council president and the Secretary-General.
美方的军事冒险行为，违背国际关系基本准则，加剧地区局势的紧张动荡。
The military adventurism of the US has breached the basic norms governing international relations and triggered greater tensions and turbulence.
安理会负有维护国际和平与安全的首要责任，应切实承担起《联合国宪章》赋予的职责。
As the Security Council has the primary responsibility to uphold international peace and security, it should earnestly fulfill its duties enshrined in the UN Charter.
中方作为安理会常任理事国，将继续秉持客观公正立场，同有关各方一道，共同维护国际法和国际公平正义，维护中东海湾地区的和平与安全。
As a permanent member of the Security Council, China will, in an objective and fair spirit, continue to work with other parties to uphold international law, international justice as well as peace and security in the Middle East and the Gulf region.
问：在美伊紧张局势加剧背景下，中方是否会增加在中东地区的安全存在？
In light of increasing tensions between the US and Iran, is China planning to increase its security presence in the region?
答：刚才我在回答其它记者提问时已经说过了。中方对当前中东事态高度关切。
As I said earlier, China is highly concerned about the current situation in the Middle East.
中东海湾地区局势进一步恶化，不符合任何一方的利益。
No one wants to see deterioration of the situation.
确保该地区和平稳定，对全世界都至关重要。
It is of vital importance to the world that peace and stability is ensured in the region.
中方一贯反对在国际关系中滥用武力，我们呼吁有关各方保持克制，避免事态轮番升级，尽快回到对话协商的轨道上来，推动紧张局势实现降温。
China opposes the abuse of force in international relations. We call on relevant parties to exercise restraint to avoid a spiral of escalation, and return to dialogue and consultation as soon as possible in order to de-escalate tensions.
中方将继续秉持客观公正立场，为维护中东海湾地区和平与安全发挥建设性作用。
With an impartial and fair stance, China will continue to make constructive efforts for peace and security of the Gulf regionin in the Middle East.
2020年1月3日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on January 3, 2020
问：当地时间1月3日凌晨，伊朗伊斯兰革命卫队“圣城旅”部队指挥官苏莱曼尼在伊拉克巴格达机场空袭中遇害。
On the early morning of January 3 local time, Iranian Quds Force commander Qasem Soleimani was killed in an airstrike at Baghdad's airport.
美方证实发动了此次袭击。
The US confirmed it launched the attack.
中方对此有何评论？
Does China have any comment?
答：我们高度关注有关事件。
China has been closely following the relevant situation.
中方一贯反对在国际关系中使用武力，主张各方应切实遵守《联合国宪章》宗旨和原则以及国际关系基本准则。
We oppose the use of force in international relations and believe that all sides should earnestly abide by the purposes and principles of the UN Charter and the basic norms governing international relations.
伊拉克的主权、独立和领土完整应当得到尊重，中东海湾地区的和平与稳定应当得到维护。
Iraq's sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity must be respected, and peace and stability of the Gulf Region in the Middle East must be upheld.
我们敦促有关各方，特别是美方保持冷静克制，避免紧张局势进一步升级。
We urge the relevant parties, the US side in particular, to remain calm and restrained and avoid further escalating the tensions.
问：中方对朝鲜劳动党七届五中全会的结果有何评论？
Does China have any comment on what comes out of the 5th Plenary Meeting of the 7th Central Committee of the Workers' Party of Korea?
答：朝鲜劳动党七届五中全会日前闭幕，并发布了会议公报。
The 5th Plenary Meeting of the 7th Central Committee of the Workers' Party of Korea has concluded and released a communique.
我们注意到，会议总结了近一段时期朝各领域，特别是经济领域的建设成果，明确了今后社会经济发展的目标和努力方向。
We noted that this meeting reviewed the recent achievements made by the DPRK in various fields, especially in the economic field and pointed out the goals and direction for its future social and economic development.
作为友好近邻，中方支持朝方坚持发展经济，提高人民生活水平，不断取得社会主义建设新成就。
As a friendly close neighbor, China supports the DPRK in remaining committed to developing its economy, improving its people's living standards, and striving to make new achievements in its socialist cause.
会议公报还就朝美关系释放了很多重要信息。
The communique also sent out important information about the DPRK-US relations.
中方希望朝美双方尽快恢复对话并谈出成果，相向而行，实现良性互动，为打破僵局、推动半岛问题的政治解决进程取得新进展作出切实努力。
China hopes that the DPRK and the US will resume dialogue as soon as possible and achieve outcomes, meet each other halfway for positive interaction, and work to break the deadlock and make new progress in the political settlement of the Peninsula issue.
问：俄罗斯从今年1月1日起正式接任金砖国家主席国。
Russia assumed the BRICS presidency on January 1.
据报道，俄方对未来的金砖合作提出了一些设想。
It reportedly made some proposals on future BIRCS cooperation.
中方对俄罗斯接任金砖轮值主席国以及今年的金砖合作有何期待？
Does China have any specific expectations on Russia's presidency and the BRICS cooperation this year?
答：金砖国家是具有全球影响的新兴市场国家和发展中国家合作机制。
BRICS is a cooperation mechanism with global influence among emerging markets and developing countries.
近年来，金砖国家凝聚力日益加强，务实合作不断深入，影响力持续上升，已经成为国际事务中一支越来越重要的力量。
In recent years, there has been a growing cohesion within BRICS countries, as BRICS countries enjoy stronger practical cooperation and rising influence and ascend to become a significant force in international affairs.
当前国际局势错综复杂，单边主义和保护主义逆流涌动，强权政治和霸凌行径大肆横行。
The international landscape we are facing today is very complicated against the headwind of rampant unilateralism, protectionism, power politics and bullying practices.
金砖国家如何应对世界变局，如何在国际事务中发挥建设性作用，受到国际社会的高度关注。
The international community is attentively watching how BRICS countries react to these challenges and play a constructive role in international affairs.
俄罗斯是今年金砖国家主席国，计划于7月在圣彼得堡举办金砖国家领导人第十二次会晤。
As this year's president, Russia plans to hold the 12th BRICS summit in Saint Petersburg.
在两国元首的战略引领下，中俄关系已迈入守望相助、深度融通、开拓创新、普惠共赢的新时代。
Under the strategic guidance of the two heads of states, China-Russia relations are marching into a new era of mutual support, in-depth integration, innovation and mutual benefit.
中方将全力支持俄方主席国工作，同俄方及其他金砖国家保持密切协作，推动圣彼得堡会晤取得圆满成功。
China fully supports Russia in its presidency and will closely collaborate with Russia and other BRICS countries to ensure the success of the Saint Petersburg summit.
中方期待金砖合作在“俄罗斯年”能够取得新进展和新成果，巩固金砖国家战略伙伴关系，深化经贸财金、政治安全、人文交流“三轮驱动”合作，拓展“金砖+”合作。
As BRICS enters into the "year of Russia", China hopes that BRICS cooperation will make new progress and achieve new outcomes. BRICS countries will consolidate their strategic partnership, advance the three-pillar-driven cooperation in the areas of economy, peace and security and people-to-people exchanges, and expand "BRICS plus" cooperation.
中方也期待金砖国家在共同维护世界和平与发展、捍卫国际公平正义、坚持多边主义和多边贸易体制等方面发挥更大作用，为推动构建人类命运共同体作出更大贡献。
China also hopes that BRICS countries will play a positive role in safeguarding world peace and development, championing international fairness and justice, adhering to multilateralism and the multilateral trading system, and make greater contribution to the building of the community with a shared future for mankind.
问：中方是否认为美国空袭巴格达是合法行为？伊朗官员表示，伊方将采取报复措施。
A follow-up question on US air strikes in Baghdad. Does China think this operation was a lawful act? Iran official said that Iran will take revenge for the general's assassination.
中方认为这将对地区局势造成什么影响？
What influence will this have on the situation in the region?
答：我刚才已经说过了，中方一贯反对在国际关系中动辄使用或威胁使用武力，我们始终主张国与国之间应按照《联合国宪章》宗旨和原则以及国际关系基本准则处理相互关系，化解彼此分歧。
Like I just said, we oppose the wanton use of force or threat of use of force in international relations and believe that all sides should follow the purposes and principles of the UN Charter and the basic norms governing international relations to handle their relations and resolve differences.
我们敦促有关各方，特别是美方保持冷静克制，避免紧张局势进一步升级，这符合各方利益。
We urge the relevant parties, the US side in particular, to remain calm and restrained and avoid further escalating the tensions. This serves the interests of all parties.
问：伊朗苏莱曼尼将军在打击“伊斯兰国”、“努斯拉阵线”等地区恐怖组织方面曾发挥重要作用，但他今天上午遭美军袭击死亡。
Iranian General Soleimani, who has had the most important role in combating and defeating ISIS, al-Nusra and other terrorist groups in the region, has been assassinated by the US forces in Baghdad early this morning.
你如何评价美方这种挑衅性的举动及其对中东和平稳定造成的影响？
How do you evaluate this provocative act and its effects on Middle East peace and stability ?
答：我刚才已经说过了，我们高度关注有关事件。
As I said, China has been closely following the relevant situation.
中方一贯反对在国际关系中使用武力，始终主张各方应切实遵守《联合国宪章》宗旨和原则以及国际关系基本准则。
We oppose the use of force in international relations and believe that all sides should earnestly abide by the purposes and principles of the UN Charter and the basic norms governing international relations.
2020年1月2日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on January 2, 2020
应埃及外交部长舒克里、吉布提外交与国际合作部长优素福、厄立特里亚外交部长奥斯曼、布隆迪外交部长尼比吉拉、津巴布韦外交与国际贸易部长莫约邀请，国务委员兼外交部长王毅将于1月7日至13日对上述国家进行正式访问。
At the invitation of Minister of Foreign Affairs of Egypt Sameh Hassan Shoukry, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Djibouti Mahmoud Ali Youssouf, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Eritrea Osman Saleh Mohammed, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Burundi Ezechiel Nibigira, and Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Trade of Zimbabwe Sibusiso Busi Moyo, State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi will pay official visits to the aforementioned countries from January 7 to 13.
问：你刚才宣布了王毅国务委员兼外长将访问有关非洲国家的消息。
You just announced State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi's upcoming visits to Africa.
我们知道，中国外长每年首次出访都会选择非洲。
Chinese foreign ministers have been choosing Africa as the destination for their first overseas visits each year.
你能否进一步介绍有关情况？
What is the main goal of State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi's visit this year?
答：王毅国务委员兼外长此次访问非洲五国，是中国外长自1991年以来连续第30年新年首访前往非洲。
Since 1991, Africa has been the destination for Chinese foreign ministers' first overseas visits each year. State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang's visit this time will be the 30th consecutive year.
这一良好传统充分体现了中方对发展中非关系的高度重视，是中非友好历久弥坚的有力证明。
The continuation of this fine tradition once again speaks volumes about the high priority China consistently attaches to developing its ties with Africa as well as ever stronger China-Africa friendship.
今年是中非合作论坛成立20周年，也是落实2018年中非合作论坛北京峰会成果的重要一年。
This year marks the 20th anniversary of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation (FOCAC) and is an important year to implement the outcomes of the 2018 FOCAC Beijing Summit.
王毅国务委员兼外长访非期间，将秉持习近平主席提出的真实亲诚理念和正确义利观，同非方深入沟通对接，推动落实习近平主席同非方领导人达成的重要共识和论坛北京峰会成果，推进中非共建“一带一路”，弘扬中非传统友谊，推动双边和中非关系实现新的发展。
State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi's upcoming visit will follow President Xi Jinping's ideal of upholding the principles of sincerity, real results, amity and good faith and pursuing the greater good and shared interests to strengthen communication and complementarity with the African countries, implement the important consensus reached by President Xi Jinping and African leaders and jointly follow through on the outcomes of the FOCAC Beijing Summit with a view to advancing China-Africa BRI cooperation, building on China-Africa traditional friendship and moving forward the bilateral ties between China and relevant African countries and China-Africa relations as a whole.
问：据报道，朝方称，在美方取消对朝敌视政策前，朝鲜将继续推进战略武器开发。
The DPRK said it will continue to develop strategic weapons before the US withdraws its hostile policy against the country.
答：延续朝鲜半岛对话缓和局面，推进半岛问题政治解决进程，符合有关各方的共同利益。
It serves the common interests of all sides to sustain dialogue, promote de-escalation and advance the political settlement of the Peninsula issue.
当前形势下，加剧紧张、不利于对话的行动不可取。
Under the current circumstances, it is not advisable to take actions that lead to escalated tensions rather than dialogue.
我们希望有关方面、特别是朝美双方坚持对话协商，相向而行，积极寻找打破僵局的办法，为推动政治解决半岛问题做出切实努力。
We hope relevant sides, the DPRK and the US in particular, will stick to dialogue and consultation, move towards each other, actively look for ways to break the deadlock, and make concrete efforts to advance political settlement.
问：我有两个问题：第一个问题，美国总统特朗普称，他期待于1月15日之前同中方签署第一阶段经贸协议。
I've got two questions. First question, President Trump has said he's looking forward to signing a phase one trade deal with China on or before January 15.
中方代表团是否准备前往华盛顿签署协议？
Will a Chinese delegation visit Washington to sign this phase one trade deal?
答：关于中美经贸磋商的有关具体问题，建议你向商务部询问。
I'd like to refer you to the Commerce Ministry for questions regarding China-US trade talks.
你的下一个问题是什么？
What is your second question?
记者：第二个问题，有消息人士称，由于中英政治关系紧张，沪伦通暂停交易。
Journalist: The second question, sources say that the stock connect program between Shanghai and London has been temporarily halted because of political tensions with Britain.
你能否证实？
Could you please confirm this?
耿爽：这是谁说的？英国人吗？
Who said that? Is the UK side saying that?
记者：路透社和其他英国媒体。
Journalist: It's by Reuters and other British media.
答：你说的具体情况我不了解，建议你向有关部门和企业询问。
I'm not aware of the specific situation and you may ask relevant authorities and businesses.
我想强调的是，我们希望英方为中国企业赴英投资提供公平、公正、开放、非歧视的营商环境，为中英各领域务实合作顺利开展创造适宜的条件。
I want to stress that we hope the UK will provide fair, just, open and non-discriminatory business environment for Chinese enterprises and create enabling conditions for China-UK practical cooperation in various fields.
问：据报道，美国国务卿蓬佩奥因伊拉克局势将推迟访问中亚等国。
US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo has postponed his upcoming travels which include Central Asian countries due to rising tensions in Iraq.
美方此前曾表示将在同有关国家双边会谈以及“中亚五国+美国”（C5+1）外长会期间谈及新疆问题。
He once said that he would raise Xinjiang-related issues in bilaterals and the C5+1 ministerial.
中方对美方推迟访问有何评论？
What is your comment on this postponement?
答：我前天曾就美方宣布将在“中亚五国+美国”外长会晤期间讨论涉疆问题表明了中方的立场。
I stated China's position on US announcement of planned discussions about Xinjiang in C5+1 ministerial the day before yesterday.
今天我愿再次强调，中国和中亚国家是友好邻邦和战略伙伴，双方合作有坚实的基础、丰富的内涵和广阔的前景。
China and Central Asian countries are friendly neighbors and strategic partners. Bilateral cooperation enjoys solid foundation, multiple dimensions and broad prospects.
中亚五国都是新疆的近邻，比美国更了解新疆的真实情况，也更有发言权。
The five Central Asian countries are all close neighbors to Xinjiang. They have a better understanding of and are in a better position to tell the real situation in Xinjiang than the United States.
日前，塔吉克斯坦外长穆赫里丁在会见中国驻塔吉克斯坦大使时表示，恐怖主义和宗教极端化是国际社会的公敌，各国都应予以谴责和合作打击，不能采取双重标准。
When meeting with the Chinese Ambassador to Tajikstan the other day, Tajikistan's Minister of Foreign Affairs Sirojiddin Muhriddin said that terrorism and religious extremism are the common enemy to the international community. All countries should join forces to condemn and combat them. No double standards should be tolerated in this area.
塔方支持中国政府的治疆政策，支持中方在新疆采取的去极端化举措，支持新疆保持繁荣稳定。
Tajikistan supports the Chinese government's Xinjiang policies and the de-radicalization measures adopted to maintain prosperity and stability there.
中方对上述表态表示高度赞赏。
The Chinese side speaks highly of such remarks.
我们坚信，中亚各国政府和人民发展对华睦邻友好关系、同中方共同打击“三股势力”的决心是坚定的。
We firmly believe that the governments and people of the Central Asian countries are determined in developing good neighborly and friendly relations with China and in jointly combating the "three evil forces".
不管美方是否到访，中国和中亚国家的世代友好和互利合作都在那里。
Whether the visits by the US side materialize or not, nothing will shake the time-honored friendship and mutually beneficial cooperation between China and the Central Asian countries.
任何蛊惑和抹黑都不会奏效，任何离间和挑拨也都不会得逞。
Attempts at instigation, slander or discord-sowing between China and Central Asian countries will never succeed.
问：据报道，印尼外交部1日发表声明称，中方以本国渔民长期活动为依据进行专属经济区声索缺乏法律依据，从未得到《联合国海洋法公约》承认。
In a statement issued on January 1, the Indonesian Ministry of Foreign Affairs noted that China's claims to the exclusive economic zone on the grounds that its fishermen have long been active there have no legal basis and have never been recognized by UNCLOS.
2016年菲律宾南海仲裁案裁决结果也对中方主张予以否认。
Jakarta also noted that the argument had been refuted by the award of the Arbitral Tribunal in the South China Sea arbitration established at the request of the Philippines.
答：关于中方在南海问题上的立场和主张，我在前天记者会上已经详细作了阐述，今天我就不重复了。
I elaborated on China's position and propositions on the South China Sea issue the day before yesterday and see no need to repeat them here.
这里我要强调的是，中方的立场和主张符合包括《联合国海洋法公约》在内的国际法。
I want to stress that China's position and propositions comply with the international law, including UNCLOS.
无论印尼方面接受与否，都无法改变中方在相关海域拥有权益的客观事实。
So whether the Indonesian side accepts it or not, nothing will change the objective fact that China has rights and interests over the relevant waters.
南海仲裁案所谓的裁决是非法的、无效的，中方早就阐明不接受、不承认的严正立场。
The so-called award of the South China Sea arbitration is illegal, null and void and we have long made it clear that China neither accepts nor recognizes it.
中方坚决反对任何国家、团体和个人滥用非法仲裁裁决损害中方利益。
The Chinese side firmly opposes any country, organization or individual using the invalid arbitration award to hurt China's interests.
2019年12月31日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on December 31, 2019
问：你能否透露中美双方将何时签署第一阶段经贸协议？昨天有报道称，中方代表团可能于本周前往华盛顿并将于周六同美方签署协议。
Do you have any update on when China and the US might sign the phase one trade deal? There was a report yesterday that the Chinese delegation might be going to Washington this week and perhaps sign the deal this Saturday.
这是否属实？
Is this true?
答：关于这个问题，建议你向商务部询问。
I would like to refer you to the Ministry of Commerce.
问：纽约时间12月30日，安理会再次就中俄提出的政治解决半岛问题决议草案进行了磋商。
On December 30 EST, another round of consultations were held in the UN Security Council on the draft resolution on political settlement of the Peninsula issue proposed by China and Russia.
你能否介绍有关情况？
Can you talk more about it?
答：纽约时间12月30日，中俄召集安理会成员就政治解决朝鲜半岛问题决议草案举行了第二轮非正式磋商，各方就决议草案进一步交换了意见，并愿就下步协商保持沟通。
On December 30 EST, China and Russia had the second round of informal consultations with other Security Council members on the draft resolution on the political settlement of the Korean Peninsula issue. All sides further exchanged views and expressed willingness to stay in contact for more consultations.
中方在安理会的有关行动，再次体现了中方为保持半岛问题政治解决势头、避免局势恶化甚至失控的努力和担当。
China's actions showed once again China's endeavor to maintain the momentum of political settlement and to prevent deterioration or even losing control of the situation.
我们愿继续为推动政治解决、鼓励对话协商、维护半岛和平稳定发挥积极作用。
We will continue to play a positive role to promote political settlement, encourage dialogue and maintain peace and stability on the Peninsula.
当前，半岛和平的窗口再度面临变数。
Currently the window of opportunity for peace is facing uncertainties again.
我们希望有关各方都能承担自身责任，把握机会，展现灵活和诚意，同中俄一道，为管控局势、推动政治解决半岛问题发挥建设性作用。
We hope all relevant sides will shoulder due responsibilities, grasp the opportunity, demonstrate flexibility and good faith, and make constructive efforts with China and Russia to manage the situation and promote political settlement.
问：你能否透露伊朗外长扎里夫和王毅国务委员会谈的具体情况？
Can you give us more details about the talks between Iranian Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif and State Councilor Wang Yi?
答：今天中午，国务委员兼外交部长王毅在北京同伊朗外长扎里夫举行了会谈。
On December 31, State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi held talks with his Iranian counterpart Mohammad Javad Zarif in Beijing.
王毅国务委员表示，今天是2019年的最后一天，欢迎你今年第四次访华。
Wang said today is the last day of 2019 and I'm glad to meet you on your fourth visit to China this year.
我愿同你盘点中伊关系，落实好两国元首共识，巩固政治互信，深化务实合作，推动中伊全面战略伙伴关系向前发展，共同开辟让人们充满期待的新的一年。
I would like to take stock of China-Iran relations with you, implement the consensus reached by the two heads of state, consolidate political mutual trust, deepen practical cooperation, move forward the China-Iran comprehensive strategic partnership and open up a new year full of promise.
王毅国务委员表示，伊核局势酝酿重要变化，全面协议面临严峻挑战。
Wang noted that important changes are brewing surrounding the Iranian nuclear issue and the JCPOA is facing severe challenges.
美国单方面退出全面协议，放弃应尽国际义务，并对伊进行极限施压，这是当前伊核问题出现紧张局势的根源所在。
The US has unilaterally withdrawn from the JCPOA, shirked its international obligations and exerted maximum pressure on Iran. This is the root cause of the current tension over the Iranian nuclear issue.
王毅国务委员强调，全面协议业经联合国安理会决议核可，是多边外交的重要成果。
Wang stressed that the JCPOA, approved by the Security Council resolution, is an important outcome of multilateral diplomacy.
维护全面协议的权威性和有效性，就是维护多边主义，维护国际法，维护国际关系基本准则。
To uphold the authority and effectiveness of the JCPOA means to uphold multilateralism, international law and basic norms governing international relations.
中方支持一切有助于缓和当前紧张局势，维护全面协议的建设性努力，希望协议参与方坚持正确方向，顶住外部压力，通过对话协商处理存在的分歧，坚定维护和执行好全面协议。
China supports all constructive efforts to ease the current tension and safeguard the JCPOA. We hope that all parties to the JCPOA will stick to the right direction, stand up to external pressure, resolve existing differences through dialogue and consultation, and firmly uphold and implement the Iranian nuclear deal.
中方将坚定捍卫国际公平正义，反对任何单边主义和霸凌行径，推动伊核问题得到政治外交解决。
China will resolutely safeguard international fairness and justice, oppose unilateralism and bullying behavior, and work for the political and diplomatic settlement of the Iranian nuclear issue.
扎里夫积极评价并感谢中方为维护伊核问题全面协议发挥的重要作用，通报了伊方就伊核问题同俄罗斯、欧洲等进行磋商的情况，表示伊方愿与中方保持密切沟通，坚持多边主义，反对单边主义，切实维护全面协议，捍卫自身正当权益。
Zarif commended and appreciated China's important role in upholding the JCPOA and briefed the Chinese side on what has been discussed regarding the nuclear issue with Russia, Europe among others. He said Iran is willing to maintain close communication with China, adhere to multilateralism while opposing unilateralism, earnestly uphold the JCPOA and defend its legitimate rights and interests.
伊方高度重视对华关系，致力于深化对华合作，愿同中方一道推动伊中全面战略伙伴关系再上新台阶。
Iran attaches great importance to relations with China. It is committed to deepening cooperation with China and stands ready to work with China to scale new heights in China-Iran comprehensive strategic partnership.
问：中俄两国领导人今天互致新年贺电，对明年的中俄关系进行了展望。
Leaders of China and Russia exchanged congratulatory messages today, extending good wishes for the new year and planning for bilateral relationship in 2020.
能否介绍一下中方对明年中俄两国加强全方位合作和战略协作有什么新的设想？
Can you tell us if China has any new visions for China-Russia comprehensive cooperation and strategic coordination in the year to come?
答：今年是中俄建交70周年。
This year marks the 70th anniversary of the establishment of China-Russia diplomatic ties.
在习近平主席和普京总统的战略引领下，中俄关系阔步迈入新时代，两国战略协作不断展现新作为，务实合作接连实现新突破。
Under the strategic guidance of President Xi and President Putin, China-Russia relationship has entered a new era. There have been new outcomes in strategic coordination and breakthroughs in practical cooperation.
环顾世界，中俄之间建立了最成熟、最牢固、最稳定的一组大国关系。两国领导人对此予以高度评价，两国社会各界也就此形成了一致共识。
Our bilateral relationship is the most mature, solid and stable one among all those between major states, which has received high appraisal from our leaders and is the common view of our people in various sectors.
明年是二战胜利75周年和联合国成立75周年，国际形势将继续复杂深刻演变。
The year 2020 will be the 75th anniversary of the victory of the WWII and the founding of the United Nations, and there will continue to be complex and profound changes in the international landscape.
明年也是中国全面建成小康社会的收官之年和俄罗斯实现国家发展复兴的关键年份，中俄关系的重要性将进一步凸显，两国各领域合作大有可为。
It will also be the final year for China to finish building a moderately prosperous society in all respects, and a key year for Russia to realize development and revitalization. Our bilateral relationship will be even more essential, and our cooperation will have even greater potential.
“道阻且长，行则将至。”
As the Chinese saying goes, "Long and difficult as the journey may be, sustained actions will take us to the destination."
中方将继续同俄方一道坚定前行，全面落实两国元首达成的重要共识，进一步加强战略沟通与协作，为捍卫两国共同利益、维护世界和平稳定贡献更多“中俄智慧”和“中俄方案”。
China will continue to work with Russia to implement our leaders' important consensus, strengthen strategic communication and coordination, and contribute more "China-Russia wisdom" and "China-Russia proposals" to safeguard mutual interests as well as world peace and stability.
问：今天上午外交部发布了基里巴斯总统马茂将访华的消息。
The Foreign Ministry announced Kiribati President Maamau's visit to China this morning.
你能否进一步介绍有关情况？
Can you give us more details on that?
答：应国家主席习近平邀请，基里巴斯共和国总统塔内希·马茂将于2020年1月4日至11日对中国进行国事访问。
Invited by President Xi Jinping, President Maamau will pay a state visit to China from January 4 to 11.
这是中基复交以来基里巴斯总统首次访华，也是新一年中方接待的首场国事访问。
This will be the first visit to China by the Kiribati president after our two countries resumed diplomatic relationship, and the first state visit that China will receive in the year of 2020.
访问期间，习近平主席将同马茂总统举行会谈，李克强总理将会见马茂总统。两国领导人将就双边关系以及共同关心的国际和地区问题深入交换意见。
During this visit, President Maamau will have talks with President Xi Jinping and meet with Premier Li Keqiang, discussing bilateral relations and regional and international issues of mutual interest.
除北京外，马茂总统还将访问上海、浙江和广东。
Besides Beijing, President Maamau will also visit Shanghai, Zhejiang and Guangdong.
中基两国复交以来，两国各领域交流合作全面展开，并已取得一批早期收获。
Since China and Kiribati resumed diplomatic relationship, we have achieved early harvests in bilateral exchange and collaboration.
中方愿同基方一道，以马茂总统访华为契机，在平等和相互尊重的基础上，加强各领域务实合作和友好交流，更好地造福两国人民。
Taking President Maamau's visit as an opportunity, China would like to work with Kiribati to enhance practical cooperation and friendly exchange on the basis of equality and mutual respect, delivering greater benefits to the two peoples.
问：据报道，印尼方面称发现中国船只在纳土纳海域从事非法捕捞活动，已召见中国驻印尼大使表达抗议。
Indonesia said that Chinese vessels have been found illegally fishing in its waters in Natuna which borders the South China Sea. Jakarta has summoned the Chinese ambassador there and apparently registered their protests.
你可否提供更多信息？
Do you have any information on this?
答：中国对南沙群岛拥有主权，对南沙群岛有关海域拥有主权权利和管辖权。
China has sovereignty over the Nansha Islands and has sovereign rights and jurisdiction over relevant waters near the Nansha Islands.
同时，中国在南海拥有历史性权利。
In the meantime, China has historical rights in the South China Sea.
中国渔民一直在中国南沙群岛有关海域开展正常的渔业生产活动，合法合理。
Chinese fishermen have long been engaging in fishery activities in relevant waters near the Nansha Islands, which has all along been legal and legitimate.
中国海警船按照自身职责在有关海域开展常态化巡逻管理，维持海上秩序，保护本国人民的正当权益。
The China Coast Guard were performing their duty by carrying out routine patrol to maintain maritime order and protect our people's legitimate rights and interests in the relevant waters.
中国驻印尼大使已向印尼方面重申了中方上述一贯立场。
Our ambassador to Indonesia reiterated China's consistent position to the Indonesian side.
中方愿与印尼方面一道，继续通过双边对话妥善管控分歧，共同维护好两国友好合作关系和当前南海和平稳定的大局。
China would like to work with Indonesia to continue managing disputes properly through bilateral dialogue, and to maintain friendly cooperation as well as peace and stability in the South China Sea.
问：朝鲜劳动党正在举行七届五中全会，尚未对外公布会议的具体内容。
In the DPRK, the Workers' Party of Korea are holding the fifth plenary meeting of its seventh Central Committee, but the details are yet to be known.
中方对此有何期待？此外，我们都很关注朝鲜最高领导人金正恩即将发表的2020年新年贺词内容。
I wonder if you have any expectations? Besides, we are keen to hear Chairman Kim's new year message for 2020.
中方对他的新年贺词有何期待？
Can you also share with us your expectations on that?
答：我和你一样，都非常关注朝方正在举行的此次会议。 同样，我们也非常关注朝方可能发表的新年贺词。
Like you, I'm also following the session being held now in the DPRK and the new year message likely to be delivered.
问：美国国务院宣布，国务卿蓬佩奥将于下月初访问哈萨克斯坦、乌兹别克斯坦等国，并赴塔什干出席“中亚五国+美国”（C5+1）外长会晤。
US Secretary of State Pompeo is reportedly visiting Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan, and attending the C5+1 ministerial in Tashkent at the beginning of January.
美国务院官员称，蓬佩奥将在双边会谈和“C5+1”会议中讨论新疆问题，美方没有看到新疆局势出现任何明显改善。
Official from the US Department of State said that Pompeo would mention Xinjiang-related issues in bilateral talks and the C5+1 ministerial, as the US has not seen any kind of significant improvement in the situation in Xinjiang.
中方对此有何评论？
What's your comment ?
答：中国和中亚国家是友好邻邦和战略伙伴，双方唇齿相依、安危与共。
China and Central Asian countries are friendly neighbors and strategic partners as close as lips and teeth that share weal and woe.
五国都是新疆的近邻，新疆的真实情况到底怎么样，中亚五国比美国更了解，也更有发言权。
As all five countries in central Asia are next to Xinjiang, they are more aware of and in a better position to tell the real situation in Xinjiang than the US.
如果我没记错的话，在今年9月“中亚五国+美国”外长会期间，美方就曾试图给中方泼脏水，挑拨离间，但没有成功。
In the C5+1 ministerial in September, the US tried to drive a wedge between China and Central Asian countries by smearing China, but that didn't succeed.
如果美方此次还想故伎重演，结果一定还是徒劳。
If the US wants to play the old trick this time, its attempt will be all in vain once again.
中亚国家在涉疆问题上一贯理解和支持中方，积极评价中方采取的反恐和去极端化举措，我们对此表示高度赞赏。
When it comes to Xinjiang-related issues, Central Asian countries have always been understanding and supporting China and speaking highly of our measures on counter-terrorism and deradicalization. We highly commend that.
我们坚信，中亚各国政府和人民发展对华睦邻友好关系、同中方共同打击“三股势力”的决心是坚定的，任何蛊惑和抹黑都不会奏效，任何离间和挑拨都不会得逞。
We are convinced that the governments and people of these Central Asian countries have firm resolve to develop good neighborly relations with China and fight terrorism, separatism and religious extremism. Attempts to deceive and smear or to drive a wedge between China and Central Asian countries will never succeed.
长期以来，中国和中亚国家尊重各自走符合本国国情的发展道路，在涉及彼此核心利益和重大关切问题上始终相互支持，在共建“一带一路”框架下开展了卓有成效的合作，为促进地区的互联互通、经济发展、民生改善、社会稳定发挥了积极作用。
China and Central Asian countries have long been respecting each other's development path that suits each country's own condition, and supporting each other on issues concerning core interests and major concerns. We have conducted effective BRI cooperation that is conducive to regional connectivity, economic growth, people's livelihood and social stability.
如果美方真的关心中亚地区的发展，关心中亚人民的福祉，就应该展现真心实意、拿出真金白银，为中亚地区做一些实事、做一些好事，对中亚国家和中国之间的合作一味地干扰、搅局，有失水准，自损形象，不得人心，注定失败。
If the US truly cares about the development of Central Asia and the people there, why doesn't it demonstrate greater sincerity by making concrete contributions? Being a spoiler will only hurt its image and its attempts that have never been popular will fail again.
问：据报道，26日，一名27岁的中国男子因闯入位于美国佛罗里达州基韦斯特的海军航空基地并用手机拍照而遭到逮捕。
On December 26, a 27-year-old Chinese man was arrested while taking photos at a US Navy base in Key West, Florida.
中方能否介绍有关情况？
Do you have more information on that?
答：根据我目前了解的情况，中国驻美使领馆已经接到美方关于一名中国公民于26日被捕的通报，驻休斯敦总领馆已与当事人取得联系。
As far as I know, the Chinese diplomatic missions in the US have been informed by the US side about the arrest of a Chinese citizen on December 26. The Chinese Consulate-General in Houston has got in touch with this Chinese citizen.
我们要求美方依法、公正调查，妥善处理此案，切实保障涉事中国公民的合法正当权益。
We ask the US side to carry out fair investigations in accordance with law, properly handle this case, and ensure the legitimate rights and interests of the Chinese citizen involved.
元旦、春节将至，我们再次提醒海外中国公民加强遵纪守法和自我保护意识，不要在军事禁区或其他敏感区域逗留或拍照，严格按照有关提示和标识行事。
The New Year and the Chinese Lunar New Year holidays are around the corner. Once again, we want to remind our citizens overseas to heighten their awareness of law and self-protection, not to linger in or photograph restricted military areas or other sensitive places, and to strictly follow relevant signs and warnings.
中国政府高度重视维护海外中国公民的安全与合法权益，一贯要求海外中国公民遵守当地法律法规，不从事任何违法活动。
The Chinese government attaches great importance to protecting the safety and legitimate rights and interests of Chinese citizens overseas, asks them to observe laws and regulations of host countries and not to engage in any form of illegal activities.
中国驻外使领馆将继续在职责范围内为中国公民提供必要领事协助。
Chinese diplomatic missions will provide necessary consular assistance to our citizens within the extent of their duties.
明天是2020年元旦假期，外交部例行记者会将按惯例休会一天，于1月2日（周四）恢复。
In observance of New Year's Day holiday, our press conference will be in recess on Wednesday, January 1 and resumed on Thursday, January 2.
休会期间，发言人办公室将照常接受记者电话、传真、邮件、微信提问。
During the recess, you may still reach the Foreign Ministry Spokesperson's Office via telephone, email, WeChat and fax.
今天是2019年最后一场外交部记者会，也是白宾最后一次出席外交部例行记者会。
This is our last press conference in 2019, and the last time that Mr. Ben Blanchard attended our conference.
如果我没有说错的话，白宾先生担任路透社驻华记者已经有16年了，是蓝厅的常客，见证了几位外交部发言人的进进出出，是老资格了，比我资格老。
Mr. Blanchard has been a Reuters journalist stationed in China for 16 years. As an old frequenter here in Lanting, he witnessed so many press conferences hosted by different spokespersons and was present in this room long before I was.
他的敬业精神和专业素养令在座的各位十分钦佩，他的勤学好问和锲而不舍也一直激励我和我的同事们努力工作。
His professionalism, diligence and perseverance have won much admiration from his peer journalists and encouraged my colleagues and me to keep up the good work.
借这个机会，我代表在座的各位，祝白宾在新的岗位上一切都好，也期待在蓝厅能与他重逢！
We wish him all the best at his new post, and we hope one day we will meet him again in this room.
今天是2019年的最后一天。
This is the last day of the year 2019.
在过去一年里，中国外交继续开拓进取、砥砺前行，又取得了新的重要成就。一年以来，各位中外记者风雨无阻、不辞辛劳地来参加我们每天的例行记者会，你们是当之无愧的中国外交的记录者、见证者和观察者。
It has been another year of new advances and new outcomes on China's diplomatic front, and another year in which you, my dear friends from the press, have been attending our press conference as chroniclers, witnesses and observers of China's diplomacy.
借这个机会，对大家一年来给予我们工作的支持和帮助表示衷心感谢，也期待来年与大家加强沟通，深化合作。
On this occasion, we'd like to express our sincerest thanks for your hardwork and look forward to greater cooperation with you in the new year.
最后，我要代表外交部新闻司和我的同事们，祝大家新年快乐、身体健康、工作顺利、阖家幸福！
On behalf of the MFA Information Department and my colleagues, I wish you health, success and happiness in the year to come. Happy new year to you all!
我们2020年再见！
See you in 2020.
2019年12月30日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on December 30, 2019
一、应国务院总理李克强邀请，老挝政府总理通伦将于2020年1月5日至9日对中国进行正式访问。
At the invitation of Premier Li Keqiang of the State Council, Lao Prime Minister Thongloun Sisoulith will pay an official visit to China from January 5 to 9.
中老互为社会主义友邻，传统友谊源远流长。
China and the Laos are friendly socialist neighbors with time-honored traditional friendship.
2019年4月，习近平总书记、国家主席同老挝人民革命党中央总书记、国家主席本扬共同签署关于构建中老命运共同体行动计划，为双边关系长远发展提供指引和遵循，开启了中老关系的新时代。
In April 2019, General Secretary and President Xi Jinping and Lao President and General Secretary of the Lao People's Revolutionary Party (LPRP) Central Committee Bounnhang Vorachit signed an action plan to build the China-Laos community with a shared future, which ushers in a new era for China-Laos relations and serves as a guidance for the long-term development of bilateral relations.
通伦总理访华期间，国家主席习近平、国务院总理李克强、全国人大常委会委员长栗战书将分别同他会见会谈，就中老关系和共同关心的问题交换意见。
President Xi Jinping, Premier Li Keqiang and Chairman Li Zhanshu of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress will meet and hold talks with Prime Minister Thongloun separately to exchange views on China-Laos relations and other issues of mutual interest.
除北京外，通伦总理还将赴陕西访问。
Besides Beijing, Prime Minister Thongloun will also visit Shaanxi.
我们相信通伦总理此次访问将进一步巩固中老双方政治互信，深化务实合作，推动中老命运共同体建设取得更大发展。
We believe that Prime Minister Thongloun's visit will further consolidate political mutual trust, deepen practical cooperation and promote the building of the China-Laos community with a shared future.
二、应国务委员兼外交部长王毅邀请，伊朗伊斯兰共和国外交部长穆罕默德·贾瓦德·扎里夫将于12月31日对中国进行正式访问。
At the invitation of State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi, Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif of the Islamic Republic of Iran will pay an official visit to China on December 31.
问：据报道，联合国安理会今天晚些时候将就中国和俄罗斯联合提出的政治解决朝鲜半岛问题决议草案进行讨论，你能否提供更多细节？
Discussions are due later today at the UN Security Council on the proposal by China and Russia to ease the sanctions on North Korea. Can you give us any details on these discussions?
中方是否就草案内容，包括撤销部分对朝制裁同朝方进行协调？
Has China been coordinating with North Korea on the content of this proposed resolution, including the sanctions that you are suggesting be lifted?
答：前不久，中国和俄罗斯共同向联合国安理会提交了政治解决朝鲜半岛问题的决议草案，我当时在这里介绍了中俄有关考虑。
Recently China and Russia jointly proposed a draft resolution to the UN Security Council regarding political settlement of the Peninsula issue, and I talked about our considerations in this room.
坚持维护半岛和平稳定，坚持通过对话协商解决问题，坚持并行推进构建半岛永久和平机制和实现半岛无核化，是中俄推动决议草案的出发点。
The purpose for China and Russia's draft resolution is to maintain peace and stability on the Peninsula, stick to resolution through dialogue and consultation, and advance the establishment of a permanent peace mechanism and complete denuclearization on the Peninsula in parallel.
中俄提议调整部分对朝制裁措施，是为了满足朝方人道民生领域的合理需求，并支持有关政治对话进程。
Our proposal to adjust some of the sanctions on the DPRK is to meet the reasonable humanitarian and livelihood needs of the DPRK people in support of the process of political dialogue.
目前，中俄正同安理会成员和半岛问题有关方面就决议草案内容保持沟通。
China and Russia are now in contact with other Security Council members and relevant parties of the Peninsula issue on the content of the draft resolution.
中方期待安理会成员在半岛问题上承担起责任，采取积极行动支持政治解决、鼓励对话协商、维护半岛的和平稳定。
We expect members of the Security Council to shoulder their responsibility and take active moves to support political settlement, encourage talks and safeguard peace and stability on the Peninsula.
问：美国国务卿蓬佩奥29日发推特称，从西藏到新疆，中共的镇压运动并非为打击恐怖主义，而是试图消除本国公民的信仰和文化。
US Secretary of State Pompeo tweeted on December 29 that from Tibet to Xinjiang, the Chinese Communist Party's repressive campaigns are not about combating terrorism but attempting to erase citizens' faiths and cultures.
美国国务院同日也发布了类似推文。
The US State Department tweeted something similar on the same day.
中方对此有何回应？
I wonder if you could comment on their tweets?
答：美方言论纯属造谣污蔑，不仅与事实完全不符，而且动机十分不纯，我们对此表示坚决反对。
What the US said is pure rumor and slander. It is completely inconsistent with the facts and ill-intentioned. We are firmly opposed to that.
当前，新疆经济持续发展，社会和谐稳定，民生不断改善，文化空前繁荣，宗教和睦和顺。
Xinjiang is enjoying sustained economic development, social stability, better living standards, unprecedented cultural vivacity and a harmonious coexistence of religions.
新疆维吾尔自治区的维吾尔族人口已经增长到1165万，约占自治区总人口的46.8%。
Uyghur population in Xinjiang has reached 11.65 million or 46.8 percent of the total.
新疆伊斯兰教清真寺有2.4万多座，平均每530名穆斯林就拥有一座清真寺。
There are over 24,000 mosques in Xinjiang, which means there is a mosque for every 530 Muslims on average.
西藏和平解放60多年来，经济蓬勃发展，社会和谐稳定，文化传统得到保护和弘扬。
In the past 60 years or so after its peaceful liberation, Tibet has enjoyed economic vitality, social harmony and stability. Its culture and tradition have be protected and promoted.
藏文成为中国第一个具有国际标准的少数民族文字。
The Tibetan language was China's first minority written language with international standard.
西藏现有1700多处各类宗教活动场所，住寺僧尼约4.6万余人。
There are more than 1,700 sites for religious activities in Tibet, and over 46,000 resident monks and nuns.
每年到拉萨朝佛信教群众达百万人次。
Millions of pilgrimages to Lhasa are made every year.
美方罔顾事实，一遍又一遍地重复谎言，留给自己的是一次又一次的道德赤字、信誉赤字和形象赤字。
By repeatedly telling lies, the US will only find itself in mounting deficit in morality, credibility and reputation.
中国新疆、西藏政治稳定、经济发展、民族团结、社会和谐的事实，是对美方诋毁抹黑言论最有力的回击。
Political stability, economic growth, ethnic solidarity and social harmony in Xinjiang and Tibet are our best response to slanders from the US side.
我在这里顺便说一句，根据我刚刚看到的美联社、《今日美国报》和美国东北大学联合发布的数据，2019年美国发生41起死者达4人以上的大规模杀戮事件，其中33起为大规模枪击事件，共造成211人死亡，创上世纪70年代以来新高。
By the way, I just saw some data jointly published by the Associated Press, USA TODAY and Northeastern University of the United States. In 2019 there were 41 mass killings in the US, defined as when four or more people are killed. Of those, 33 were mass shootings. More than 211 lives were lost, the highest since the 1970s.
2019年全年，美国与枪支有关的案件共造成1.48万人失去生命。
Throughout the year 2019, gun-related cases took 14,800 lives.
校园枪杀案和公共场所枪杀案等大规模暴力事件的频繁发生，使得美国普通民众长期生活在对枪支暴力的恐惧之中。
Frequent violent crimes, including shootings on campus and in public places, have long been shadowing Americans with fear of gun violence.
我们奉劝美方还是要管好自己的事，把注意力放在解决自己长期存在的顽症和痼疾上，至少确保本国人民享有“免于恐惧的自由”，而不是动辄就伸长手臂去干涉他国内部事务。
We urge the US to put its own house in order and fix its deep-seated problems first, at least ensuring the "freedom from fear" for its people, rather than arbitrarily stretch its arms into other countries' domestic affairs.
我提醒他们一句，手伸得太长，容易闪着腰。
A word of advice to the US: those who overreach, should prepare to be crippled.
问：据报道，针对菲律宾参议员德利马被菲政府监禁一事，美国会在近期出台的2020年预算案中，授权美行政当局禁止菲律宾相关官员入境。
The US Congress approved a 2020 budget that contains a provision that authorized the denial of entry to Philippine officials who are involved in the incarceration of Philippine Senator Leila de Lima.
27日，菲总统发言人就此表示，菲律宾已禁止提出上述条款的美国参议员入境。如美方继续干涉菲律宾主权，菲律宾不会坐视不管。
On December 27, President Rodrigo Duterte's spokesperson said that the Philippines has banned those US lawmakers who introduced the provision from visiting, and that they will not sit idly if the US continues to interfere with its processes as a sovereign state.
中方对此有何评论？
I wonder if you have any comment on that?
答：中方一贯主张国与国之间的交往应建立在相互尊重、互不干涉内政原则基础上，反对以任何借口干涉他国内政。
China believes state-to-state relations should be based on mutual respect and non-interference in each other's internal affairs.
我们支持有关方面维护国家主权和尊严的努力。
We oppose foreign interference under whatever pretext, and we support efforts to safeguard a country's national sovereignty and dignity.
问：美方近期对在伊拉克、叙利亚境内支持伊朗的武装力量发动空袭，中方对此有何评论？
Does China have any response to the recent US air strikes in Iraq and Syria against pro-Iran forces?
答：中方一贯反对在国际关系中使用武力，主张各方应切实遵守《联合国宪章》宗旨和原则以及国际关系基本准则。
China opposes the use of force in international relations and stands for compliance with the purposes and principles of UN Charter and basic norms governing international relations.
伊拉克和叙利亚的主权、独立和领土完整应当得到切实尊重和维护。
The sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Iraq and Syria should be earnestly respected and upheld.
我们呼吁有关各方保持冷静、克制，避免紧张局势升级。
We call on relevant parties to remain calm and restrained to avoid escalating tensions.
问：你刚刚宣布了伊朗外长扎里夫将访华的消息。
You have just announced the visit of Foreign Minister Zarif to Beijing.
能否介绍扎里夫外长访华具体安排？他将和王毅国务委员兼外长讨论哪些议题？据了解，扎里夫外长今天将在莫斯科会见俄罗斯外长拉夫罗夫。
Can you provide more details about his visit here? What's he going to discuss with State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi? As we know today he's going to meet with Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov in Moscow today.
扎里夫外长访华后，中俄外长是否将通话？
Are there any plans of phone talks between Russian and Chinese foreign ministers after Foreign Minister Zarif visited Beijing?
答：如果我没记错，拉夫罗夫外长不久前刚刚同王毅国务委员通过电话。
I remember that Foreign Minister Lavrov just talked with State Councilor Wang Yi over the phone not long ago.
中俄作为全面战略协作伙伴，在伊核问题以及其他重大国际和地区热点问题上，一直保持着密切的沟通和协调。
As comprehensive strategic partners of coordination, China and Russia have been in close communication and coordination on the Iranian nuclear issue and other major international and regional hotspot issues.
关于扎里夫外长访华的有关安排，我可以告诉你的是，届时，王毅国务委员兼外长将同扎里夫外长举行会谈，就伊核等双方共同关心的问题交换意见。
During Foreign Minister Zarif's stay in China, State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi will hold talks with him and exchange views on the Iranian nuclear issue and other issues of mutual interest.
中方愿同伊方一道努力，推动中伊全面战略伙伴关系持续稳步发展，共同维护伊核全面协议及中东海湾地区的和平与稳定。
China would like to work with Iran to ensure the steady development of the China-Iran comprehensive strategic partnership, safeguard the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, and uphold peace and stability of the Gulf Region in the Middle East.
有关访问的情况，我们会及时发布消息。
We will release relevant information on the visit in due course.
2019年12月27日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on December 27, 2019
问：25日，吉尔吉斯斯坦总统热恩别科夫举行年度记者会表示，吉中双边关系水平持续提升。
Kyrgyz President Jeenbekov said at his annual press conference on December 25 that relations between Kyrgyzstan and China have continued to be better.
作为吉最大投资来源国，中国帮助吉实施了许多民生项目。
As the biggest source of investment for Kyrgyzstan, China has helped it with multiple livelihood projects.
吉尔吉斯斯坦将全力推动吉中关系高水平运行。
Kyrgyzstan will make all-out efforts to keep bilateral relations running at a high level.
中方对此有何评价？
What's your comment?
答：中国和吉尔吉斯斯坦是友好邻邦和全面战略伙伴。
China and Kyrgyzstan are friendly neighbors and comprehensive strategic partners.
近年来，在两国领导人关心和推动下，中吉关系取得长足发展。双方政治互信不断提升，共建“一带一路”成果丰硕，人文合作蓬勃开展，安全合作不断深化。
In recent years, with the personal attention and promotion of our leaders, China-Kyrgyzstan relations have made great strides, as evidenced by greater mutual political trust, fruitful BRI cooperation, flourishing people-to-people exchange and deepening security cooperation.
中吉关系处于历史最高水平，已成为相互尊重、友好合作、互利共赢国家间关系的典范。
Our bilateral relationship is at its historical best, becoming an exemplar of state-to-state relations featuring mutual respect, friendly cooperation and win-win results.
近年来，两国在共建“一带一路”框架下实施了南部电网改造、奥什医院、比什凯克市政路网改造等一系列重大民生项目，为当地经济社会发展和民生改善作出重要贡献。
In recent years, under the framework of BRI cooperation, our two countries have jointly carried out major livelihood projects including the renovation of grid in southern Kyrgyzstan, the Osh Clinic Hospital and the road network rehabilitation project in Bishkek, which have greatly enhanced socioeconomic development and local people's welfare.
中方愿继续同吉方深化各领域合作，推动中吉关系不断取得新成果，更好造福两国人民。
China stands ready to work with Kyrgyzstan to deepen cooperation across the board, make new progress in bilateral relations and deliver more benefits to the two peoples.
问：据报道，26日，巴基斯坦三军公共关系局发消息称，印度军队过去36小时内在克什米尔控制线沿线多次违反停火协议。
The Inter-Services Public Relations of the Pakistan Armed Forces said that India repeatedly violated the ceasefire agreement along the Line of Control in Kashmir during the last 36 hours.
作为回应，巴军在哈吉皮尔山口摧毁一处印军哨所并击毙3名印士兵，2名巴士兵阵亡。
Responding to that, Pakistan Army troops damaged an Indian post near the Haji Pir Pass. Three Indian soldiers were killed and two Pakistani troops died.
印军方称，巴军违反停火协议，在巴拉穆拉地区向印方开火，造成印1名士兵和1名平民丧生。
The Indian army said Pakistan violated the ceasefire agreement and opened fire in Baramulla, which killed one Indian soldier and one civilian.
答：我们注意到有关报道，对当前事态表示关注。
We note media reports on that and are following the latest situation.
作为印、巴的共同邻国，中方呼吁双方保持克制，避免采取加剧局势紧张的行动，通过对话和平解决争议，共同维护地区和平稳定。
As a neighbor to both India and Pakistan, China calls on the two countries to exercise restraint, avoid actions that might escalate tensions, peacefully resolve disputes through dialogue and jointly maintain regional peace and stability.
问：哈萨克斯坦今日发生一起坠机事故已造成超过15人死亡，是否有中国乘客伤亡的消息？
There's a plane crash today in Kazakhstan and there are already more than 15 people confirmed dead. Do you have any information on casualties involving Chinese passengers?
答：我们看到了有关消息，对遇难者表示深切哀悼，对遇难者家属和伤者表示诚挚慰问。
We have noted the news. We are deeply saddened by the passing of the victims and extend sincere condolences to their families and the injured.
事故发生后，中国驻哈萨克斯坦使领馆已经联系哈有关部门核实情况。
The Chinese embassy and consulate general in Kazakhstan contacted Kazakh departments to confirm relevant information after the plane crash.
目前，尚未收到中国公民在此次事故中伤亡的通报。
Till this moment there has been no notification of casualties involving Chinese citizens.
如果有进一步的消息，我们会及时发布。
We will update you if and when we have further information.
2019年12月26日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on December 26, 2019
问：据了解，中国、伊朗、俄罗斯三国将于明天在印度洋北部举行联合军演，你能否介绍此次军演的目的？
China, Iran and Russia are supposed to conduct military exercises in the northern Indian Ocean tomorrow. I'm just curious if you have any more information about the purpose of these exercises?
答：据我了解，这次演习是中伊俄三国开展的正常军事交往活动，具体情况请你向国防部了解，他们今天下午有记者会。
The exercises are a normal military exchange for China, Iran and Russia. I'd refer you to the Ministry of National Defense for more specifics. They have a press conference scheduled for this afternoon.
2019年12月25日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on December 25, 2019
问：第八次中日韩领导人会议已经结束。外界特别是日韩媒体高度关注此次会议并进行了充分报道，也给予了较高的评价。
There has been much attention and wide, positive coverage especially from Japanese and ROK media on the eighth China-Japan-ROK leaders' meeting that has just concluded.
那么中方如何评价这次中日韩领导人会议的成果？
What does China think of the outcomes?
答：第八次中日韩领导人会议昨天在四川成都成功举行。
The eighth China-Japan-ROK Summit Meeting was held in Chengdu, Sichuan yesterday.
三国领导人就中日韩合作以及地区和国际问题深入交换看法，高度评价过去二十年中日韩合作不断拓展深化取得的丰硕成果，以及为促进东北亚地区的和平与发展作出的重要贡献。
Leaders of the three countries had an in-depth exchange of views on trilateral cooperation as well as regional and international issues. They spoke highly of the fruitful outcomes of expanding and deepening trilateral cooperation in the past two decades and its contribution to peace and development in Northeast Asia.
会议发表了《中日韩合作未来十年展望》，通过了“中日韩+X”早期收获项目清单等成果文件。
A document titled "Trilateral Cooperation Vision for the Next Decade" and another one on the "China-Japan-ROK plus X" early achievement outcomes were released during the meeting.
昨天，李克强总理在同文在寅总统、安倍晋三首相共同会见记者时已经对会议成果给予了充分评价。
Premier Li Keqiang already talked about the outcomes of this meeting yesterday at a joint press conference with President Moon Jae-in and Prime Minister Shinzo Abe.
这里我想强调的是，此次中日韩领导人会议是一次具有战略性和前瞻性的会议，为未来十年三国的合作指明了方向，确定了基调：
I'd just stress that this is a strategic meeting of vision that has charted the course and set the tone for trilateral cooperation in the next decade.
一是深化合作。
First, deepen cooperation.
三国一致同意增强政治互信，从战略和长远角度正视历史、开辟未来，视对方发展为机遇，将在环保、气变、卫生、老龄化、创新、体育、青少年等领域加强合作，不断做大共同利益的蛋糕。
We three countries agreed to strengthen political mutual trust, adopt a strategic and long-term perspective to face the past and open up the future, and see each other's development as opportunities. we will enhance cooperation in such fields as environmental protection, climate change, health, aging, innovation, sports and youth to make a bigger pie of common interests.
三方还将加强“中日韩+X”合作，与更多国家实现共同发展。
We will also step up China-Japan-ROK plus X cooperation to achieve shared development with more countries.
二是坚持开放。
Second, stay committed to openness.
三国一致同意坚持开放包容，共同维护多边主义和自由贸易，推动区域全面经济伙伴关系协定（RCEP）早日签署，加快推进中日韩自贸区谈判，共同促进区域经济一体化进程。
We three countries agreed to remain open and inclusive and work together to uphold multilateralism and free trade. We will work for the early signing of RCEP and accelerate negotiation of a trilateral free trade area to advance regional integration.
三是共同引领。
Third, spearhead regional efforts together.
作为对亚洲和平与稳定负有重要责任的国家，三国一致同意立足东亚、聚焦亚太，加强在地区和国际事务中的沟通协调，共同引领区域合作，打造符合地区国家需要的东亚合作架构，进一步促进地区与世界的和平稳定与发展繁荣。
Shouldering important responsibility for peace and stability in Asia, we three East Asia-based countries agreed to focus on Asia-Pacific, strengthen communication and coordination in regional and international affairs, jointly spearhead regional cooperation and build an architecture for East Asia cooperation that serves the needs of regional countries, thus contributing to peace, stability, development and prosperity in the region and beyond.
昨天，三国领导人在成都杜甫草堂出席中日韩合作二十周年纪念活动时，共同种下一棵桂花树。
At a commemorative event to mark the 20th anniversary of China-Japan-ROK cooperation at Du Fu Thatched Cottage in Chengdu yesterday, the three leaders planted an osmanthus tree together.
十年，一棵小树可以成长为参天大树。
In ten years' time, a sapling can grow into a towering tree.
希望十年以后，步入而立之年的中日韩合作能够结出更多硕果，为地区乃至世界的繁荣稳定作出更大贡献。
It is our hope that the trilateral cooperation will bear more fruits in its 30s to contribute more to regional and world stability and prosperity.
问：昨天，美国总统特朗普表示，他会和中国领导人举行中美第一阶段经贸协议签署仪式。
US President Donald Trump said yesterday that he and the Chinese leader will have a signing ceremony for the phase-one trade deal.
你能否提供更多情况？签署仪式将于何时何地举行？中美双方是否就此进行过讨论？
Can you give us details on this? Where and when will it be?
答：上周，中美两国元首进行了通话。
Have China and the US had discussions on this?
在通话中双方谈到了中美第一阶段经贸协议问题，有关情况我们已经发布了消息稿，你可以查阅。
Last week, the Chinese and US heads of state talked over telephone about the phase-one trade deal among other things. You may refer to our press release on this.
至于你关心的第一阶段协议签署问题，我可以告诉你的是，目前双方经贸团队正在就协议签署具体安排等后续工作保持密切沟通。
As to your question about the signing, I can tell you that the two teams are in close communication regarding the follow-up matters including the signing of the deal.
问：23日，俄罗斯总统普京签署总统令，表示为进一步发展俄中关系，扩大科技创新领域合作，决定于2020年至2021年举办俄中科技创新年。
Russian President Vladimir Putin signed a presidential decree on December 23, designating the year of 2020 and 2021 the "Year of Scientific and Technological Innovation" in Russia and China with a view to further developing bilateral relations and expanding cooperation in scientific and technological innovation.
中方能否介绍更多情况？
Can you give us more details?
答：今年6月，习近平主席和普京总统共同确定2020至2021年举办中俄科技创新年。
In June, President Xi and President Putin jointly decided to designate the year of 2020 and 2021 the "Year of Scientific and Technological Innovation" in each other's countries.
这是继中俄互办“国家年”、“语言年”、“旅游年”、“青年年”、“媒体年”和“地方交流年”之后，两国再次举办国家级主题年活动，明确了下一阶段中俄关系和务实合作发展的重点方向，这也体现了双方持续推进合作、不断提升两国关系水平的强烈愿望和坚定决心。
This is another national theme year after previous programs featuring national exchange, languages, tourism, youth exchange, media and sub-national exchange. It outlines the priority area in bilateral relations and practical cooperation in the next stage and demonstrates the two sides' aspiration and resolution to boost cooperation and elevate bilateral relations.
科技创新一直是中俄务实合作中的重点领域。
Scientific and technological innovation has always been a key area of China-Russia pragmatic cooperation.
俄罗斯在基础研究和原始创新方面独具优势，中国在信息通信、卫星导航、无人机、超级计算机等方面逐步走向世界前列。
Russia has a unique advantage in basic research and original innovation, while China has gradually become a front runner in information and telecommunications, satellite navigation, drones and supercomputers.
两国可以取长补短，彼此借力，共同提高技术能力和国际竞争力。
The two countries can draw on each other's strengths to enhance their technological capabilities and global competitiveness.
近年来，中俄双方在示范快堆、远程宽体客机等高技术领域的合作取得丰硕成果，未来在信息通信技术、人工智能、物联网等领域的研发合作也潜力巨大。
In recent years, bilateral cooperation in hi-tech sectors including demonstration fast reactor, long-range wide-body passenger aircraft has yielded fruitful results. Research and development cooperation in such areas as ICT, AI and Internet of things holds great promise.
目前，两国相关部门正密切沟通，加紧制定中俄科技创新年重点任务清单、实施方案等事宜。
At present, relevant departments in the two countries are in close communication to formulate a priority task list and specific measures.
相信双方将以举办科技创新年为契机，推动两国科技创新合作取得更多新成果，有力促进两国共同发展振兴，也为人类的科技发展进步作出更大贡献。
We believe the two sides will take the "Year of Scientific and Technological Innovation" as an opportunity to make new progress, promote shared development and revitalization and make greater contributions to advances in science and technology for all mankind.
问：据报道，23日，沙特利雅得刑事法庭宣判沙记者卡舒吉遇害案5名嫌疑人死刑，3人监禁。
On December 23, Riyadh's criminal court sentenced five people to death and three to jail over the murder of Saudi journalist Khashoggi.
答：中方注意到沙方就卡舒吉案作出判决，支持沙方依法处理此案，相信该案能够在沙司法框架下得到妥善处理。
We noted the Saudi ruling on the Khashoggi case. We support Saudi Arabia in dealing with it according to law and believe it will be properly handled under the country's judicial framework.
卡舒吉案是沙特内政，案件处理不应政治化、国际化。
As this case is Saudi Arabia's internal affair, it should not be politicized or internationalized.
问：据了解，今天中日外长进行了会晤。
We have learned about a meeting between the Chinese and Japanese foreign ministers today.
你能否提供更多情况？
Could you offer more information?
答：目前我还不了解这次会晤的具体情况。
I have no specific information to offer at this moment.
请你耐心等待一下，中方会及时发布消息稿。
Please wait for our press release which will come out soon.
2019年12月24日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on December 24, 2019
2019-12-24 问：上周有外国记者问你如何评价今年中国外交，你当时说王毅国务委员年终一般都会接受中国媒体采访，建议他关注。
When asked to comment on China's diplomacy in 2019 last week, you said that State Councilor Wang Yi usually takes a year-end interview with Chinese media and suggested that the journalist may wait for it.
我们注意到王毅国委昨天已经接受了媒体专访。
We note that he gave the interview yesterday.
你能否进一步介绍有关情况？
Could you share more information?
答：王毅国务委员昨天接受了中国媒体的年终采访，回顾一年来的中国外交，并对明年外交工作重点进行展望。
State Councilor Wang Yi gave an exclusive year-end interview with Chinese media yesterday, during which he took stock of China's diplomacy this year and charted the future for key diplomatic agenda next year.
2019年，世界乱象丛生，挑战上升。
In 2019, there has been disorder in many parts of the world with increasing challenges.
王毅国务委员用“不畏风雨、坚定前行”八个字来概括中国外交一年来走过的极不平凡的历程。
Speaking of the extraordinary journey over the past year, State Councilor Wang said, "weathering rain and storm, China has forged ahead on the diplomatic front."
面对动荡不安的国际形势、持续低迷的世界经济、步履维艰的全球治理局面，中国外交在以习近平同志为核心的党中央的坚强领导下，继续开拓进取，攻坚克难，取得了一系列新的重要进展。
Under the leadership of the CPC Central Committee with Comrade Xi Jinping as its core, we have pressed ahead, overcome challenges and achieved new, important advances amid turmoil and instability in international landscape, the sluggish world economy and difficult situation of global governance.
一年来，我们坚定捍卫多边主义，坚守国际公平正义，发出了反对单边主义、霸权主义和强权政治的正义声音。
Over the past year, we have stayed committed to multilateralism, championed international fairness and justice, and rejected unilateralism, hegemony and power politics.
我们稳定运筹同主要大国关系，大力推进与周边及发展中国家互利合作，为政治解决国际和地区热点问题贡献中国智慧，引领全球治理进程，为保持国际局势总体稳定注入正能量。
We have steadily developed relations with other major countries, vigorously advanced mutually-beneficial cooperation with neighboring and developing countries, and contributed wisdom to resolving international and regional hotspot issues. We have spearheaded global governance and added stability into the international landscape.
我们秉持互利共赢原则，宣布新的对外开放重大举措，为维护自由贸易、构建开放型世界经济作出新的贡献。
We have stay committed to the principle of mutual benefit and win-win results, announced new major measures for opening-up and provided new impetus for free trade and an open world economy.
面对外部干涉和挑衅，我们坚定捍卫国家主权、安全、发展利益，有力地维护了国家、民族和人民的尊严。
In the face of external interference and provocation, we have firmly defended national sovereignty, security and development interests, and resolutely upheld the dignity of the country, nation and people.
明年将是中华民族伟大复兴进程中具有重大意义的一年，中国将彻底消除绝对贫困，全面建成小康社会，实现第一个百年目标。
Next year will be a year of great significance for the renewal of the Chinese nation. In 2020, China will eradicate extreme poverty and build a moderately prosperous society in all respects, meeting our first centenary goal.
王毅国务委员将明年中国外交工作重点概括为“六大任务”，并提出了方向、目标和具体举措。一是服务国内发展，二是维护国家利益，三是深化伙伴关系，四是捍卫多边主义，五是扩大国际合作，六是推进外交体系和能力现代化。
State Councilor Wang outlined our work on the diplomatic front in the coming year with the following six major tasks with specific goals, courses and measures to be achieved: first, to serve major national development strategies; second, to defend national interests; third, to deepen partnerships; fourth, to champion multilateralism; fifth, to expand international cooperation; and sixth, to modernize our system and capacity for diplomacy.
新的一年里，我们将紧密团结在以习近平同志为核心的党中央周围，深入贯彻习近平外交思想，接续奋斗，开拓进取，为国家和民族担当，为世界和人类尽责。
In the coming year, we will rally closely around the CPC Central Committee with Comrade Xi Jinping as its core, implement Xi Jinping Thought on Diplomacy and continue to forge ahead. We will fulfill our responsibilities to our country, to the Chinese nation, and to the world and all humankind.
我们期待与国际社会携手合作，风雨同行，共同推动构建人类命运共同体。
We hope to work together with the international community against all odds to build a community with a shared future for mankind.
问：有关在成都举行的中日韩领导人会议的问题。
A question about the China-Japan-South Korea trilateral in Chengdu today.
会议是否讨论了中俄提交的关于缓解对朝制裁的安理会决议草案？如果讨论了，日韩双方是如何回应的？
Was there any discussion about China's joint proposal with Russia to ease sanctions on the DPRK? If there was, what was the response that China got?
答：今天上午，第八次中日韩领导人会议在成都举行，会议情况中方将会发布消息，请你保持关注。
The eighth China-Japan-ROK Leaders' Meeting was held in Chengdu this morning. You may follow up on our press release that will soon come out.
据我目前了解的情况，三国领导人就朝鲜半岛局势深入交换了意见。
According to the information on hand, the three leaders had an in-depth exchange of views over the Korean Peninsula situation.
三国重申，实现半岛无核化与东北亚持久和平是三方共同目标，对话协商是解决半岛问题的唯一有效办法。
They reiterated that denuclearization of the Peninsula and lasting peace in Northeast Asia is a shared goal and that dialogue and consultation is the only viable way to solve the Peninsula issue.
三国强调，要继续通过政治外交方式解决半岛问题，要加强三国在半岛事务上的沟通协调，共同为实现半岛无核化和东北亚地区长治久安发挥建设性作用。
They stressed the need to resolve the issue through political and diplomatic means, strengthen the three sides' communication and coordination on Peninsula affairs, and to make constructive efforts in realizing denuclearization of the Peninsula and lasting peace in Northeast Asia.
这是我目前掌握的情况。
This is all I can share at the moment.
问：本月20日，中国赠埃塞俄比亚的一颗卫星在太原卫星发射中心成功发射升空，请问中方为什么要帮助埃塞俄比亚发射卫星？
On December 20, a satellite given by China to Ethiopia was sent into space in China's Taiyuan Satellite Launch Center. Could you tell us the reason behind China's assistance?
答：埃塞俄比亚首颗人造地球卫星20日在中国太原发射升空，这一天对于中国和埃塞俄比亚两国人民都是值得庆祝的日子。
Ethiopia's first satellite was successfully launched in China's Taiyuan on December 20, an event worth celebrating in both countries.
我们常说，中国和非洲的友谊不是抽象的，而是具体的，这体现在中非合作的丰硕成果上，航空航天就是其中一个新兴的重要领域。
As we often say, the friendship between China and Africa is concrete, not abstract. It is embodied in our fruitful cooperation, of which space and aviation is an emerging and important area.
去年9月，中非合作论坛北京峰会通过《中非合作论坛北京行动计划（2019-2021年）》，其中提到，中方愿继续向非洲国家提供气象和遥感应用设施和教育培训援助，提升非洲国家防灾减灾和应对气候变化能力。
In September 2018, the FOCAC Beijing Action Plan (2019-2021) was adopted at the FOCAC Beijing Summit. In this document, it is stated that China will continue to provide meteorological and remote-sensing application equipment, education and training support for African countries, in order to better equip African countries for disaster prevention and mitigation as well as climate change response.
凡是答应非洲兄弟的事，中方一定会尽心尽力办好。
We do our utmost to keep our promises to African brothers.
我们为埃塞发射的这颗卫星，是中国应对气候变化“南南合作”的项目，目的是帮助埃塞开展应对气候变化、农业等领域研究，促进当地经济和社会发展。
The satellite launched for Ethiopia is a project under China's climate change South-South cooperation aimed to help Ethiopia with research in climate change response and agriculture and boost economic and social progress.
这也是继尼日利亚、阿尔及利亚等国之后，中国再次帮助非洲国家发射卫星。
Before this launch, China has also helped send satellites into space for other African countries including Nigeria and Algeria.
需要强调的是，在卫星研制过程中，中国和埃塞两国的科学家一直通力合作，中方对埃塞的技术人员进行了卫星技术等方面的培训。
I'd like to stress that Chinese and Ethiopian scientists built this satellite in close collaboration. The Chinese side also provided Ethiopian technicians with training in satellite technology.
卫星入轨后，埃塞方面可以自主进行控制和使用。
After the satellite enters into orbit, Ethiopia will be able to operate it independently.
我想这充分体现了中方“授人以鱼，更要授人以渔”的合作理念。
This is another example showing China's concept of teaching someone to fish rather than giving him a fish.
中非一贯是休戚与共的命运共同体和合作共赢的利益共同体。
China and Africa have always been a community with a shared future and common interests featuring win-win cooperation.
我们愿继续与非洲国家一道，推进包括航天合作在内的各领域合作，在更高质量、更高水平上支持非洲兄弟早日实现“非洲梦”，实现中非合作共赢、共同发展。
We stand ready to work with African countries to promote cooperation in space and other sectors to help African brothers realize their African dream with higher quality and at a higher level and achieve win-win cooperation and shared development in the process.
问：据报道，24日，尼泊尔警方称逮捕了122名中国公民。
The police in Nepal today said they had arrested 122 Chinese citizens.
你可否提供详细信息？对此有何评论？
Do you have any details or comments on this case?
答：根据我目前掌握的信息，这些中国公民涉嫌从事跨境网络诈骗活动，目前相关案件正在调查中。
Based on my information at present, these citizens are suspected of engaging in cross-border cyber fraud activities. The case is still under investigation.
此次行动是中尼两国警方积极配合开展的一次重要行动。
This is a major operation conducted in collaboration by the Chinese and Nepalese police.
中方愿继续同尼方加强包括执法领域在内的各领域合作，共同打击跨境犯罪，推动两国人民友好交往。
We will continue to work with Nepal to enhance cooperation in law enforcement and other fields, fight cross-border crime and facilitate friendly exchange between the two peoples.
问：乌兹别克斯坦于12月22日举行了议会选举。
Parliamentary elections were held in Uzbekistan on December 22.
中方对此有何评论？
Would you like to make a comment?
答：乌兹别克斯坦议会选举日前顺利举行，中方对此表示祝贺。
China congratulates Uzbekistan on its smooth parliamentary elections.
应乌兹别克斯坦中央选举委员会邀请，中方派团赴乌兹别克斯坦观察了选举。
At the invitation of the Central Election Commission, China sent a delegation to observe the elections.
中方认为，此次选举民主、公开、透明，体现了乌兹别克斯坦的政治开放和包容，中方给予积极评价，我们真诚祝愿乌兹别克斯坦人民在国家发展道路上取得更大成就。
We believe it was a democratic, open and transparent process that demonstrated Uzbekistan's political openness and inclusiveness. China commends it and wishes the Uzbekistan people greater progress in national development.
作为友好近邻和全面战略伙伴，中方高度重视中乌关系，愿同乌方一道努力，加大相互支持和战略协作，深化共建“一带一路”合作，推动两国关系不断向前发展。
As Uzbekistan's friendly neighbor and comprehensive strategic partner, China attaches high importance to this relationship. We stand ready to work with Uzbekistan to enhance mutual support and strategic coordination, deepen BRI cooperation, and bring bilateral relations to new heights.
问：中方昨天发布有关中国领导人会见文在寅总统的消息稿中提到，文在寅总统表示，无论香港事务还是新疆事务，都是中国的内政。
According to China's readout yesterday on President Xi Jinping and President Moon Jae-in's meeting, President Moon said Hong Kong and Xinjiang affairs are China's internal affairs.
但是韩方否认了这一消息，表示文在寅总统没有表明涉及香港和新疆事务的立场。
But the ROK side has denied this, saying President Moon didn't state any position regarding Hong Kong and Xinjiang.
答：中方的消息稿你已经看到了吧？我昨天在这里也回答了NHK记者的提问。
I trust you have read China's press release? I also responded to an NHK question here yesterday. The press release is a thorough description of the meeting.
我们对会见情况的介绍在消息稿里已经得到了充分的体现，你可以再去查阅一下。
I suggest you read it again.
问：王毅国务委员回顾2019年外交工作谈到朝鲜半岛问题，他呼吁美方尽快拿出落实新加坡共识的实际举措。
State Councilor Wang Yi talked about the Korean Peninsula issue when looking back on China's diplomacy in 2019. He called on the US to take concrete steps as soon as possible to deliver what has been agreed in Singapore.
这一实际举措的具体内容指什么？中方认为朝方已经落实了新加坡共识吗？
What "concrete steps" was he referring to? Does China believe the DPRK has already implemented the Singapore consensus?
答：不久前，中方同俄罗斯一道在联合国安理会共同提出了有关半岛问题的决议草案。
Not long ago, China and Russia tabled a draft resolution on the Korean Peninsula issue at the UN Security Council.
中俄都认为当前半岛的缓和局面值得各方珍惜，当前政治解决半岛问题的机遇各方也应该抓住。
Both believe that the current de-escalation should be cherished, and the opportunity for a political settlement seized.
我们鼓励各方特别是美朝都能够坚定致力于对话协商，相向而行，早日打破对话僵局，推动半岛问题的政治解决进程取得新的进展。
We encourage all parties, especially the US and the DPRK, to stay committed to dialogue and consultation, move towards each other, break the deadlock as soon as possible, work for new progress in the political settlement process.
同时，中方主张根据形势发展调整对朝制裁的立场也是非常明确的，在中俄共同散发的决议草案中对此也有明确的表述。
At the same time, our position is clear that sanctions on the DPRK should be adjusted in light of new developments. There is explicit expression in the draft resolution by China and Russia.
我们愿继续就半岛问题同各方保持密切沟通，同各方一道努力，推动半岛问题的政治解决进程不断向前走并取得进展，特别是不要出现大的逆转。
We stand ready to stay in close communication with all parties to the Peninsula issue and work in concert to make progress in the political settlement, and in particular head off a dramatic reversal.
2019年12月23日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on December 23, 2019
问：日前，古巴第九届全国人民政权代表大会召开会议，根据国家主席迪亚斯-卡内尔的提名，表决通过马雷罗任总理。
At a recent session of the ninth Legislature of the National Assembly of People's Power of Cuba, the nomination of Manuel Marrero as prime minister put forward by President Miguel Diaz-Canel was approved.
中方是否致贺？对中古关系有何期待？
Has China sent congratulations? What's its expectation for China-Cuba relations?
答：当地时间12月21日，古巴第九届全国人民政权代表大会第四次会议根据国家主席迪亚斯-卡内尔的提名，表决通过马雷罗出任古巴新宪法实施后首任总理，这具有重要意义，中方表示热烈祝贺。
On December 21 local time, President Miguel Diaz-Canel's nomination of Manuel Marrero as Cuba's first prime minister after the country enacted its new constitution was approved at the fourth session of the ninth Legislature of the National Assembly of People's Power. China extends warm congratulations to this significant event.
李克强总理已向马雷罗总理发去贺电。
Premier Li Keqiang has sent a congratulatory message to Prime Minister Marrero.
古巴是西半球第一个同新中国建立外交关系的国家，中古传统友好关系历经国际风云变幻考验，牢不可破、历久弥坚。
Cuba was the first country in the Western hemisphere that established diplomatic relations with New China. The traditional friendship has withstood the test of the changing international landscape and remains unbreakable as ever.
明年中古将迎来建交60周年。
The two sides will hold joint commemorative events to mark the 60th anniversary of diplomatic ties in 2020.
中方愿同古方一道,落实好两国元首重要共识，以共同庆祝建交60周年为契机，办好有关庆祝活动，在新的历史起点上不断深化政治互信，拓展两国合作广度和深度，推动中古传统友谊和各领域友好交流不断结出新的硕果，更好地造福中古两国人民。
At this new starting point, China stands ready to work with Cuba to implement our leaders' consensus, further deepen political mutual trust, expand the breadth and width of cooperation, consolidate traditional friendship and promote fruitful exchange to deliver more benefits to the two peoples.
问：习近平主席刚刚会见了韩国总统文在寅。中方对此有何评论？
What's China's comment on the most recent meeting between President Xi Jinping and President Moon Jae-in?
答：今天中午，习近平主席会见了文在寅总统，中方已经发布了消息稿。
President Xi Jinping met with President Moon Jae-in this morning. China has issued a press release.
我这里可以再简要介绍一下会见的情况。
I can talk a little bit more about it here.
习近平主席在会见中指出，中韩都是亚洲乃至世界上有分量、有影响的重要国家，两国在推动双边关系实现更好发展、促进地区和平稳定繁荣、捍卫多边主义和自由贸易体制等方面拥有广泛共识，也一直是紧密合作的朋友和伙伴。
During the meeting, President Xi pointed out that China and the ROK are both influential countries in Asia and the world. The two share broad consensus in promoting bilateral relations, advancing regional peace, stability and prosperity, and upholding multilateralism and the free trading regime.
过去两年多来，中韩关系保持了稳定发展的大方向。
As close friends and cooperative partners, the two sides maintained generally steady development in relations during the past two years or so.
新形势下，中韩应深化和发展战略合作伙伴关系，照顾彼此核心利益和重大关切，推动双边关系迈上更高水平。
Under new circumstances, efforts should be made to deepen the strategic cooperative partnership and accommodate each other's core interests and major concerns to bring bilateral relations to a higher level.
习近平主席强调，双方可以推动共建“一带一路”倡议同韩方发展战略规划对接进一步早见实效、早结硕果。
President Xi stressed in particular that the two sides could seek greater synergies between the BRI and the ROK's development strategies to reap early harvests.
双方要加快双边自由贸易协定第二阶段谈判，深化创新研发合作，加强执法安全合作，深化人文交流，同时不断加强在多边框架内的沟通与协调。
The two sides should accelerate phase-two negotiations of a bilateral free trade agreement, deepen cooperation in innovation, research and development, strengthen law enforcement and security cooperation, enhance people-to-people and cultural exchange, and continue to step up communication and coordination under multilateral frameworks.
文在寅总统表示，希望进一步扩大同中方在经贸、文化、体育、环保等各领域合作，推进“一带一路”倡议同韩“新南方新北方政策”对接，加快推进两国联合开拓第三方市场合作，促进韩中民心相通，不断开辟韩中关系的新时代。
President Moon expressed hope for broader cooperation with China in such areas as trade, culture, sports and environmental protection, and for greater synergies between the BRI and the ROK's New Southern Policy and New Northern Policy. He said the two sides should work together to explore third market cooperation, bring the two peoples closer and create a new era for ROK-China relations.
文在寅总统在会见中还指出，无论香港事务还是新疆事务，都是中国的内政。
President Moon also stated that affairs relating to Hong Kong and Xinjiang are China's internal affairs.
两国元首还就半岛局势交换了看法。
The two heads of state also exchanged views on the Korean Peninsula situation.
习近平主席指出，中韩在半岛问题上的立场和利益契合，都坚持维护半岛和平稳定，主张通过对话协商解决问题，两国是维稳促谈的坚定力量。
President Xi said that the two have similar positions and shared interests on this issue. Both are committed to a peaceful and stable Peninsula, advocate resolving the issue through dialogue and consultation, and stand as staunch forces for stability and dialogue.
中方支持韩方继续同朝方改善关系，为推动半岛和谈进程注入动力。
China supports the ROK in continuing to improve relations with the DPRK to inject impetus into the peace talks.
文在寅总统表示，韩方赞赏中方为解决半岛问题发挥的重要作用，半岛问题出现的和平解决机遇来之不易，韩方愿同中方一道为推进半岛和平进程共同作出努力。
President Moon said that the ROK appreciates China's important role in seeking a solution to this issue. The opportunity for a peaceful settlement didn't come easily.
我们认为，习近平主席同文在寅总统此次会见为下一阶段中韩关系的发展指明了方向。
The ROK would like to work together with China for progress in the peace process. We believe this meeting has set the course for the next stage of China-ROK relations.
我们愿同韩方一道，认真落实好两国元首的共识，推动中韩关系不断取得新的发展。
We hope to work with the ROK side to implement the two presidents' consensus and realize new progress in bilateral relations.
李克强总理也将会见文在寅总统，有关情况我们将及时发布消息。
Premier Li Keqiang will also meet with President Moon. We will keep you updated.
问：据报道，日前，美方将“2020财年国防授权法案”签署成法，其中包括歪曲抹黑中国军力发展以及涉台、涉港、涉疆、禁购有关中国产品等消极内容。
The US National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020 has been signed into law. There are negative contents distorting and smearing China's military development, issues relating to Taiwan, Hong Kong and Xinjiang, and prohibiting purchase of some Chinese products.
中方对此有何评论？
Does China have a comment?
答：我们对美方执意通过并签署含有涉华消极内容的“2020财年国防授权法案”表示强烈不满，中方已就此向美方提出严正交涉。
We deplore the US obstinate moves to pass and sign the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020, which contain negative elements on China. China has lodged solemn representations.
我们敦促美方摒弃冷战思维和意识形态偏见，客观理性看待中国发展和中美关系，不得实施有关法案中的涉华消极条款，以免损害中美关系和两国重要领域合作。
We urge the US to discard the Cold-War mentality and ideological prejudice, view China's development and China-US relations in an objective and rational manner, and not implement clauses with negative contents regarding China, lest it should affect overall China-US relations and bilateral cooperation in important areas.
问：我有两个问题。
Two questions.
第一个问题，曾在中国服刑的英国前记者韩飞龙（Peter Humphrey）日前在《泰晤士报》刊文称，伦敦一名6岁女孩在从英国最大零售商乐购超市购买的圣诞贺卡中发现字样称，“我们是上海青浦监狱的外国囚犯，被迫强制劳动。
First, a Thames article by Peter Humphrey, a British former journalist who served jail term in China, claimed that a six-year-old girl in London found a message inside a Christmas card bought from Tesco, Britain's biggest retailer. It read: We are foreign prisoners in Shanghai Qingpu Prison China. Forced to work against our will.
请帮助我们，通知人权组织并联系韩飞龙”。
Please help us, notify human rights organization and contact Mr Peter Humphrey.
你对此有何回应？第二个问题，昨晚，有4名中国籍船员在加蓬附近海域遭海盗绑架，外交部能否提供最新信息？
Do you have any response to that? Also, does the foreign ministry have any information on the four Chinese sailors kidnapped by pirates in Gabon last night?
答：关于你的第一个问题，我看到了英国媒体的有关报道，这是韩飞龙先生自己编造出来的一出闹剧。
On your first question, I have seen some British media reports. It is just a drama choreographed by Mr. Peter Humphrey.
韩飞龙先生总是耐不住寂寞，时不时地要跳出来自我炒作一番，生怕人们把他遗忘了。
Mr. Humphrey isn't one for a life far from the madding crowd. Every now and then he would pop out into the spotlight with a headline or two, as if worried that people might forget him.
但是他这次编造出来的闹剧实在是有些老掉牙了。
But his latest plot sounds all too familiar.
我奉劝他，如果希望博眼球，至少搞出一些新花样。
My advice to him: if you want to grab more eyeballs, at least come up with some new tricks.
我可以负责任地告诉你，经向有关部门了解，上海青浦监狱根本不存在外籍罪犯强制劳动的情况。
I can tell you that after verifying with relevant departments, we know for sure that there is no forced labor of foreign prisoners in Qingpu prison in Shanghai.
关于你的第二个问题，当地时间12月22日，4名不明身份的持枪武装分子对中加渔业公司的两艘渔船实施抢劫，船上4名中国籍船员被劫匪带走，目前尚不知去向。
On your second question, on December 22 local time, four unidentified armed robbers attacked two fishing boats belonging to Sigapeche and took four sailors of Chinese nationality with them. Their whereabouts are not yet known at this moment.
中国驻加蓬使馆已要求加方迅速查明情况，立即展开营救，全力解救中方人员。
The Chinese embassy in Gabon has asked the Gabonese side to act swiftly to find out what happened, launch a rescue operation, and spare no efforts to free the Chinese sailors.
我们将继续密切关注有关情况。
We will continue to closely monitor the situation.
问：还是关于美“2020财年国防授权法案”的问题，该法案正式批准成立外空军。
Also about the US National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020. It officially approved the establishment of a Space Force.
美空军参谋长称，中俄对美国来说是强有力的威胁，美国需要更强的力量应对中俄的太空能力。
The US Air Force chief of staff said that as China and Russia pose a strong threat to the US, the country needs greater strength to deal with the space capabilities of China and Russia.
答：我们看到有关报道。
We note relevant reports.
近年来，美国不顾国际社会反对，大力推进“主导外空”战略，在外空武器化和战场化道路上越走越远。
In recent years, disregarding opposition from the international community, the US has been pushing its space dominance strategy, going further down the path of weaponization of outer space and risking turning it into a new theater of warfare.
美方这些举动严重违背和平利用外空国际共识，破坏全球战略平衡与稳定，对外空和平与安全构成直接威胁。
Such moves are a serious breach of the consensus on peaceful use of outer space. They undermine global strategic balance and stability and pose a direct threat to peace and security in outer space.
中方对此深感忧虑，表示坚决反对。
China is deeply concerned about and firmly opposed to this.
美国寻求的外空安全，只是美国一家的安全，而国际社会的根本目标是维护全人类在外空的共同安全。
The space security the US has in mind is only security for itself while the fundamental purpose of the international community is to safeguard the common security of all mankind in outer space.
美方执意推进外空武器化，却反复拿中俄说事，完全是倒打一耙，纯属为自我松绑寻找借口。
In its obstinate pursuit of weaponization, the US keeps making an issue of China and Russia. That is the guilty party shifting the blame on the innocent and seeking excuses to free itself.
中方一贯主张和平利用外空，反对外空武器化和军备竞赛。
China stands for peaceful use of outer space and against weaponization of and arms race in outer space.
当前形势下，谈判达成外空军控国际法律文书的必要性和紧迫性更加凸显。
Under current circumstances, there is greater relevance and urgency to initiate negotiation of a legally-binding instrument on outer space arms control.
我们希望国际社会特别是有关大国采取慎重、负责的态度，防止外空沦为新的战场，共同努力维护外空持久和平与安宁。
We hope the international community, certain major countries in particular, will adopt a prudent and responsible attitude to safeguard lasting peace and tranquility in outer space and make sure it will not become a new battlefield.
问：针对中俄联手否决叙利亚跨境人道救援问题决议草案，21日，美国务卿蓬佩奥发声明称，俄中可耻地否决了一项允许数百万叙利亚人获得人道主义援助的安理会决议，两国手上沾有鲜血。
In his statement on December 21, US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo accused China and Russia for voting against a draft resolution on cross-border human rights aid to Syria. He said Russia and China's veto of a Security Council resolution that allows for humanitarian aid to reach millions of Syrians is shameful, and they had blood on their hands.
答：中国常驻联合国代表张军大使已经在安理会解释性发言中全面阐述了中方立场。
Ambassador Zhang Jun, Permanent Representative of China to the United Nations, has elaborated on China's position in his statement at the Security Council.
周末，我也已就此作出过回应。
I also responded to that over the weekend.
这里我要强调，跨境人道救援机制是在特定形势下采取的特殊救援方式，应充分尊重叙利亚主权、独立、统一和领土完整，充分尊重叙利亚政府意见，并结合地面形势发展进行评估和调整。
I want to stress that cross-border humanitarian relief is a special relief method adopted under specific circumstances. It should be based on full respect for Syria's sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity as well as the Syrian government's views, and it should be evaluated and adjusted in light of the developments on the ground.
中国根据事情本身的是非曲直，并从叙利亚人民根本利益出发，决定自身投票立场。
China cast its vote based on the merits of the matter itself and the fundamental interests of the Syrian people.
我们坚决拒绝美方对中国投票立场的无端指责。
China firmly rejects the groundless accusations from the US.
如果美方真正关心叙利亚人民和叙利亚人道局势，为什么不对俄罗斯决议草案投赞成票？他们完全有机会践行对叙利亚人民的承诺。
If the US really cares about the Syrian people and the humanitarian situation in Syria, why didn't they vote for the Russian draft resolution? They had every opportunity to fulfill their promise to the Syrian people.
这也再次说明，他们的关心是伪善的，所奉行的是典型的双重标准，是将人道问题政治化的具体体现。
This shows once again that their concern is hypocritical and they are pursuing typical double standard, which is a concrete manifestation of politicizing humanitarian issues.
如果美方真正关心叙利亚人民和叙利亚人道局势，就应该反躬自省，扪心自问。因为当前叙利亚的局面和叙利亚人民的苦难，恰恰是美国等一些国家的错误行动所导致，他们赤裸裸干涉他国内政，在中东地区助推“阿拉伯之春”，成为众多地区热点问题的始作俑者。
If the US really cares about the Syrian people and the humanitarian situation in Syria, it should do some self-reflection and soul-searching, because what happened in Syria, including the sufferings of its people, is inflicted exactly by the wrong actions of the US and some other countries. They blatantly interfered in others' internal affairs and helped stage the "Arab Spring" in the Middle East, being the culprit of many regional hotspot issues.
到底是谁口中满是谎言，心里充满伪善，手上沾满鲜血，世人看得非常清楚。
The world sees clearly who keep lying with hearts full of hypocrisy and blood on their hands.
我想，真正应该反思的是这些人。
It is they who should repent.
问：12月20日，美国务卿蓬佩奥发表声明，称美国务院根据1998年“国际宗教自由法案”将中国等9个国家列为所谓“特别关注国”。
US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said in a statement on December 20 that the Department of State designated 9 countries including China as Countries of Particular Concern under the International Religious Freedom Act of 1998.
答：美方有关做法罔顾事实，毫无根据，中方坚决反对。
China is firmly against the groundless US move that ignores facts.
中国政府依法保护公民的宗教信仰自由。中国各族人民依法享有充分的宗教信仰自由。
The Chinese government protects its citizens' freedom of religious belief and people of all ethnic groups enjoy full religious freedom in accordance with law.
目前，中国各类信教群众近2亿人，其中2000多万人是穆斯林，宗教教职人员38万余人，宗教团体约5500个，依法登记的宗教活动场所14万多处。
There are nearly 200 million believers in China, including over 20 million Muslims, more than 380,000 clerical personnel, approximately 5,500 religious groups and about 140,000 places of worship registered for religious activities in China.
这些基本事实不是美国个别政客可以任意抹黑的。
These are hard facts that cannot be distorted by a handful of US politicians.
中国宗教信仰自由状况怎么样，中国人民最有发言权。
The Chinese people have the best say in freedom of religious belief in China.
我们敦促美方正视和尊重基本事实，管好自己的事，停止利用宗教问题干涉中国内政。
We urge the US to face up to and respect basic facts, get its own house in order and stop interfering in China's internal affairs under the pretext of religion.
问：据报道，阿富汗现任总统加尼有望赢得大选成功连任。
According to reports, Afghanistan's President Ghani is likely to win the presidential election and get another term.
中方对此有何评论？
What is China's comment on his success?
答：我们注意到有关报道。
We noted relevant reports.
中方尊重阿富汗人民自主作出的选择，我们衷心希望阿富汗总统大选相关工作顺利推进。
China respects the independent choice made by the Afghan people. We sincerely hope that the presidential election in Afghanistan will proceed smoothly.
问：你刚才介绍习近平主席和文在寅总统会见情况时表示，文在寅总统说，“韩方认为，无论香港事务还是新疆事务，都是中国的内政”。
You said during the meeting with President Xi Jinping, President Moon Jae-in said the ROK believes Hong Kong affairs and Xinjiang affairs are both China's internal affairs.
中国媒体的报道都强调了这一点。
This statement has been underlined in reports by Chinese media.
中方对此有何评论？
What's your comments?
答：你是希望我对此进行评论吗？（记者点头）
You'd like my comment?
这是文在寅总统的表态，我认为这一表态符合事实。
This is the statement by President Moon Jae-in, which in my view captures the facts.
他说了一个基本事实，那就是，香港事务、新疆事务都是中国内政。对吧？（记者点头）
He just stated a plain fact, that is, Hong Kong affairs and Xinjiang affairs are both China's internal affairs, right?
问：12月22日，“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛咨询委员会第二次会议在北京举行。
The Second Meeting of the Advisory Council of the Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation was held in Beijing on December 22.
请问能否介绍一下会议情况？
Could you give us more details?
答：12月22日，“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛咨询委员会第二次会议在北京举行，法国前总理拉法兰、俄罗斯前总理弗拉德科夫、埃及前总理沙拉夫等多位咨委会委员参加。
The Second Meeting of the Advisory Council of the Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation was held in Beijing on December 22. Former Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin of France, former Prime Minister of Russia Mikhail Yefimovich Fradkov, former Prime Minister Essam Sharaf of Egypt and other members attended the meeting.
中共中央政治局委员、中央外事工作委员会办公室主任杨洁篪会见了与会委员。
Member of the Political Bureau of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC) and Director of the Office of the Foreign Affairs Commission of the CPC Central Committee Yang Jiechi met with them.
此次会议由外交部副部长马朝旭主持，会议讨论了落实第二届高峰论坛成果、推进高质量共建“一带一路”等议题。
Vice Foreign Minister Ma Zhaoxu chaired the meeting where members discussed the implementation of the outcomes of the second BRF and quality development of BRI.
委员们赞赏共建“一带一路”取得的进展，高度评价高质量共建“一带一路”所蕴含的共商共建共享原则、开放绿色廉洁理念、高标准惠民生可持续目标。
The council members commended the progress under the BRI and spoke highly of its principle of consultation and cooperation for shared benefits, concept of open, green and clean cooperation and pursuit of high standard, people-centered and sustainable development.
委员们建议通过建设高质量项目、完善“一带一路”合作伙伴网络、构建互联互通伙伴关系、促进世界经济增长、建设开放型世界经济、支持落实2030年可持续发展议程等举措，将第二届高峰论坛达成的政治共识转化为实实在在的成果。
They proposed further efforts on high-quality projects, better cooperative partners network of BRI and partnerships for connectivity, so as to promote global economic growth, build an open world economy and support the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. By so doing the political consensus of the second BRF will be better translated into tangible outcomes.
中方期待咨委会继续为高峰论坛的未来发展建言献策，贡献智慧和力量。
China hopes that the Advisory Council will continue to offer advice and pool wisdom for the future development of the BRF.
2019年12月20日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on December 20, 2019
应中印边界问题印方特别代表、印度国家安全顾问多瓦尔邀请，中方特别代表、国务委员兼外交部长王毅将于12月20日至21日赴印度举行中印边界问题特别代表第22次会晤。
Invited by Indian special representative on China-India boundary question and Indian National Security Adviser Ajit Doval, Chinese special representative, State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi will attend the 22nd round of the China-India Special Representatives Talks on China-India Boundary Question from December 20 to 21 in India.
问：据报道，俄罗斯总统普京19日在莫斯科举行了年度大型记者会。他在记者会上回答关于中俄关系的提问时表示，对于俄中关系而言，最重要的不是那些具体指标，而是前所未有的高水平互信。
When responding to a question on China-Russia relations during his annual press conference yesterday, Russian President Putin said that Russia and China have an unprecedented level of mutual trust and this is more important than any figures.
俄中关系是维护国际战略稳定的关键因素。
He added that the two sides' cooperation is the most important factor in international strategic stability.
双方合力捍卫国际法权威，推动构建多极化世界秩序。
The two countries work together to uphold the authority of international law and foster a multi-polar world order.
普京表示，两国将继续深化全面战略协作伙伴关系，造福两国和两国人民。
He said that the two countries will continue to deepen the comprehensive strategic partnership of coordination that will benefit both.
请问中方对此有何评论？
I wonder what's China's comment?
答：我们注意到，普京总统已经连续多年在年度大型记者会上高度评价中俄关系，这充分体现了两国关系的高水平、长期性和稳定性。
President Putin always spoke highly of China-Russia relations at annual press conferences in the past years, which speaks volumes about our high-level, long-term and stable relationship.
今年是中俄建交70周年。
This year marks the 70th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between China and Russia.
在习近平主席和普京总统的战略引领下，中俄全面战略协作伙伴关系阔步迈入新时代，不仅在双边层面收获丰硕成果，更为维护世界和平安全发挥着中流砥柱的作用。
Under the strategic guidance of President Xi and President Putin, our comprehensive strategic partnership of coordination has made big strides into a new era, delivering fruitful outcomes at the bilateral level and also acting as a pillar for world peace and security.
正如普京总统所说，两国全方位战略协作建立在坚如磐石的互信基础上，不针对第三方，也不会受到外部的干扰和破坏。
Just as President Putin put it, our comprehensive strategic partnership of coordination is based on rock-solid mutual trust. It doesn't target any third party, and will not be affected by external disruption or sabotage.
明年，双方将共同办好中俄科技创新年、纪念二战胜利暨联合国成立75周年等重要活动，加强战略协作，促进利益融通，深化传统友谊，为促进两国的发展振兴和世界的繁荣稳定作出更大贡献。
In the coming year, we will jointly celebrate the China-Russia Year of Scientific and Technological Innovation and the 75th anniversary of World War II Victory and the founding of the UN. The two sides will strengthen strategic coordination, enhance integration of interests, deepen traditional friendship, and make greater contributions to national development and rejuvenation and world stability and prosperity.
问：加拿大总理特鲁多表示，除非中方首先释放康明凯和迈克尔这两名加拿大人，否则美国就不应考虑同中方签署经贸协议。
Canadian Prime Minister Trudeau said the US should not sign a trade deal with China unless two Canadians, Michael Kovrig and Michael Spavor are first released.
答：我看到了有关报道。
I read media reports on that.
我不知道加方现在是不是有一种欲哭无泪的感觉。
I wonder if Canada feels too bitter to cry now.
替他人火中取栗，最终受伤的肯定是自己。
If you pull chestnuts out of the fire for others, you will be the one that gets burned.
我要奉劝加方，通过拉帮结派或者将一些其它议题进行挂钩向中方施压，这种做法注定是徒劳的，也是无效的。
Here's some advice to the Canadian side: don't waste your time and effort on ganging up on China or pressuring China for unrelated matters, because you will gain nothing from that.
问：一个关于朝鲜海外劳工的问题。前不久，中国向安理会提交了解除部分对朝制裁的决议草案。但另一方面，安理会对朝鲜劳工制裁的执行期限到后天就截止了。
Regarding the DPRK labor overseas, not long ago China proposed a resolution to the Security Council to lift some sanctions, but the deadline for implementing the resolution is the day after tomorrow.
请问中方在朝鲜劳工问题上的立场有没有变化？是否认为还有必要执行安理会相关决议？
Is China's position on overseas DPRK labor changed? Do you think it's still necessary to impose the sanctions?
答：中方在执行联合国安理会决议问题上的立场是一贯的。
China's position on implementing UN resolutions is consistent.
只要决议依然有效，中方就会认真履行自身国际义务，按照决议规定处理相关问题。
As long as the resolutions are still effective, we will earnestly fulfill our international responsibilities and deal with relevant matters according to the resolutions.
另外，我也要重申中方的一贯立场，中方一直认为，安理会涉朝决议应当得到全面、完整、平衡的执行。
In the meantime, I'd like to reaffirm China's position that the DPRK-related resolutions should be implemented in a comprehensive, full and balanced manner.
执行制裁是安理会决议的要求，适时调整制裁措施、推动政治解决同样是安理会决议的要求，这些都应该得到切实落实和执行。
Those resolutions require not only imposing sanctions, but also adjusting sanction measures at a proper time and working for political settlement. They should all be faithfully implemented.
问：欧洲议会通过了一项决议，要求中方关闭在新疆开设的教培中心。
The European Parliament passed a resolution calling on China to close the vocational education and training centers in Xinjiang.
决议还提到要对中方官员实施制裁。
It also calls for sanctions on Chinese officials.
中方是否认为欧方所为是在干涉中国内政？这会影响中欧关系吗？
Does China see this as interference in its local affairs? Or could this sour China-EU relations?
答：我想你可能已经注意到了，中国驻欧盟使团已经就此事作出了长篇回应，这里我就不展开讲了。
You may have noted the mission of the PRC to EU has responded to that at length.
我着重强调以下几点：
Here I won't elaborate, but I'd like to stress the following points.
第一，我们已经多次介绍过中方在涉疆问题上的立场。
First, we talked many times about our position on Xinjiang-related issues.
2015年至今，我们已经发布了7份白皮书，国新办也多次举行了记者会。中方的立场已经非常清楚、明确了。
Since 2015, seven white papers on Xinjiang have been published and press conferences have been held by the Information Office of the State Council, where China's position has been elaborated very clearly.
第二，新疆事务纯属中国内政。我们坚决反对任何人、任何势力借涉疆问题干涉中国内政。
Second, since Xinjiang affairs are domestic affairs, we firmly oppose the interference of anyone or any force under the pretext of Xinjiang-related issues.
新疆的真实情况到底怎么样，我想包括新疆人民在内的中国人民比那些远在欧洲、从来没有去过新疆的人更有发言权。
I believe Xinjiang residents and other Chinese people have greater say in Xinjiang's actual situation than those who live in Europe and have never been to Xinjiang.
第三，我们敦促欧方摒弃在反恐问题上的双重标准，切实为推动中欧关系的发展贡献正能量。
Third, we urge the EU side to reject double standards on counter-terrorism and make more contributions to China-EU bilateral relations.
问：据了解，法、德、英外交部政治总司长今天集体访华，就伊朗核问题与中方交换意见，请问能否介绍一下有关情况？
Reports say political directors of the French, German and British foreign ministries visited China together today to exchange views on the Iranian nuclear issue. Could you offer more information?
答：今天上午，外交部军控司负责人在北京与集体来访的法国、德国、英国外交部政治总司长举行磋商，就伊朗核问题深入交换意见。
This morning director-general of the Arms Control Department of the foreign ministry held consultations with visiting political directors of the French, German and British foreign ministries in Beijing to exchange views on the Iranian nuclear issue.
美国退出伊核全面协议并对伊极限施压，导致近来伊核局势持续紧张，全面协议有崩盘的风险。
The US withdrawal from the JCPOA and maximum pressure on Iran led to continued tension that risks the total collapse of the deal.
中欧作为维护多边主义的重要力量，同意加强沟通协调，积极落实今年9月伊核外长会共识，坚定推进完整、有效执行全面协议。
China and Europe, as two major forces for multilateralism, agreed to strengthen communication and coordination, carry out the consensus reached at the Foreign Ministers' Meeting on the Iranian Nuclear Issue in September, and ensure the full and effective implementation of the JCPOA.
中欧都支持外交斡旋努力，坚持在全面协议联委会框架内协商解决履约问题，双方愿共同努力，推动伊核局势走向缓和，维护国际核不扩散体系，维护中东地区和平与稳定。
Both sides support diplomatic mediation efforts and stand for resolving compliance issues through consultation within the JCPOA Joint Commission. We stand ready to work for the easing of tensions to uphold the international nuclear non-proliferation regime as well as peace and stability in the Middle East.
问：昨天，美国国务院对朝政策特别代表比根在北京同中国外交部副部长罗照辉举行了会见。
Special Representative Biegun was here in Beijing yesterday, holding talks with Vice Foreign Minister Luo Zhaohui.
你能否介绍具体情况？中方是否在推动朝鲜回到同美国对话的轨道上？
I was wondering if we can get any more details about those talks? Specifically, did Beijing try to get the DPRK to come back into discussions with the US?
答：中方已就罗照辉副部长会见比根特别代表发布了消息稿，你看到了吧？（记者点头）
We issued a press release on Vice Minister Luo Zhaohui's meeting with Special Representative Biegun. Have you read that?
我们的立场很清楚，我只想强调一点，就是中方在同美方交流时再次表示，我们希望美朝双方能够尽快恢复对话接触，相向而行，积极寻找建立信任、妥处分歧的有效方案。
Our position is clear. I only want to stress one thing. As we said again to the US side, we hope the US and the DPRK will resume dialogue and engagement as early as possible, walk toward the same direction, and work out an effective plan to build trust and resolve differences.
中美双方也就分阶段、同步走，并行推进半岛无核化和构建和平机制交换了意见。
China and the US exchanged views on advancing denuclearization and establishing a peace mechanism in a phased, synchronized and parallel manner.
双方同意就半岛问题继续保持沟通。
We agreed to keep discussing that.
另外，今天上午，外交部副部长乐玉成也会见了比根特别代表，有关情况稍后会发布，请你保持关注。
Vice Foreign Minister Le Yucheng also met with Special Representative Biegun this morning. Please stay tuned for the press release to be published later.
问：中方是否担心特鲁多总理的言论会影响中美顺利达成经贸协议？
Is China concerned that Prime Minister Trudeau's comments could make it more difficult to reach a successful deal with the US?
答：关于中美经贸磋商，中方的立场是一贯的、明确的。
China's position on China-US trade talks is consistent and clear.
至于中美达成第一阶段经贸协议的问题，近来中方、美方都有一些表态，建议你关注一下。
I'd refer you to the recent remarks by China and the US on reaching the phase-one trade agreement.
问：关于媒体报道的美国佛罗里达警方逮捕一名中国女子的事情，你昨天在记者会上已经作了原则回应。请问你有没有进一步的情况可以介绍？
About the Chinese female reportedly arrested by police in Florida, the US. I know you made a principled response yesterday, but do you have any updates now?
答：昨天，有记者问到这个问题，当时我说需要去了解一下。
I said at yesterday's press briefing that I needed to get more information on that.
根据我目前掌握的情况，中国驻美使领馆已经接到了美方关于一名中国公民于18日被捕的通报。
According to what I know so far, the Chinese embassy and consulates in the US were notified by the US side of a Chinese national arrested on December 18.
中国驻休斯敦总领馆已经与当事人取得了联系。
Our consulate-general in Houston has contacted that person.
中国政府一贯要求海外中国公民遵守当地法律法规，不从事任何形式的违法活动。
The Chinese government asks overseas Chinese citizens to observe local laws and regulations, and not to engage in any form of illegal activities.
同时，我们也要求美方依法、公正调查，妥善处理有关案件，切实保障涉事中国公民的正当权益。
In the meantime, we ask the US to investigate into this matter in a lawful and impartial way, handle the case properly and earnestly protect the Chinese national's legitimate rights and interests.
问：刚才你在回应特鲁多言论时，用了“火中取栗”这个比喻。
A follow-up question on your answer earlier about the Trudeau comments. You used the analogy of "pulling chestnut out of the fire", I'm just trying to understand what you mean by that.
你想表达什么意思？是想表达“desperate”这层意思吗？
Do you mean it's an act of desperation?
答：现在谁desperate（绝望），谁心里清楚。
The one who's desperate now knows that best.
问：美方是否曾经在中美经贸磋商过程中，将要求中方释放加公民作为达成第一阶段协议的先决条件？
Has the US side ever requested that China releasing the two Canadians should be a precondition for a phase-one deal during the trade talks?
答：关于中美经贸磋商，我们的立场是一贯的、明确的。
Our position on China-US trade consultations is consistent and clear.
中美双方近日就第一阶段经贸协议文本达成了共识，正在进行一些后续工作。
The two sides have reached consensus on the text of a phase-one deal and are working on follow-up matters.
中方、美方的一些表态，我想大家都注意到了。
I believe you have noted the statements from both sides.
我们多次说过，中美达成第一阶段经贸协议符合中方利益，符合美方利益，符合世界利益，也是国际社会的共同期待。
As we repeatedly stated, reaching a phase-one deal serves the interests of China, the US and the whole world. It is also the shared expectation of the international community.
问：你刚才说“现在谁desperate，谁心里清楚”，这句话是什么意思？谁在desperate？还有一个关于比根访华的问题。
You said earlier that "the one who's desperate now knows that best". I wonder if you could clarify that? Who is desperate? Another question is about Biegun.
此前有消息称他将开辟更多美朝的沟通渠道，甚至传言他此次会访朝。
There have been reports that he wants to open up more dialogues with the DPRK. And there have been rumors that he may even go to the DPRK this time.
中方是否认为比根应该访朝？
Does China think it would be a good idea for him to go to the DPRK?
答：我先回答第二个问题。我刚才说过了，中方始终鼓励美朝尽快恢复对话接触，相向而行，积极寻求建立信任、妥处分歧的有效方案，这是我们的一贯立场，非常明确。
To answer your second question, just as I said, China encourages the US and the DPRK to resume dialogue and engagement as soon as possible, move towards each other and seek a viable solution to build trust and solve differences.
我想无论是美方还是朝方，对中方的立场主张都是非常清楚的。
This is our consistent and clear position. Both the US and the DPRK know that clearly.
关于第一个问题，请你注意，我刚才在回答提问时，并没有使用desperate这个词，这只是BBC记者的解读。
On your first question, I'd like to bring to your attention that I didn't use the word "desperate" in my answer. It is only the interpretation of the BBC journalist.
追问一：你能否就“desperate”解释一下？
Follow-up: Can you elaborate on "desperate"?
你应该去找BBC记者寻求解释，我并没有使用desperate这个词。
You should seek clarification with the BBC journalist who brought up the word.
追问二：那你所说的“火中取栗”是什么意思？
Follow-up: What do you exactly mean by "pulling chestnuts out of the fire", please?
你不知道这句谚语吗？我想不光中国这么用，许多西方国家也都有这个谚语，它所表达的意思是不言而喻的。
Haven't you heard of the expression? I think it is used not just in China, but in many Western countries too. The meaning is self-evident.
问：你说“火中取栗最终受伤的是自己”，是想表达threat（威胁）的意思吗？
When you said if you pull a chestnut from the fire you are bound to get burned, is this a threat of some sort?
答：我在回答中既没有说desperate，也没有说threat，这些词我都没用过，都是你们的解读。
I didn't use "desperate" or "threat" in my answer. They are your interpretations.
如果你需要我用更外交的方式来回答你，我就给你一个更外交的答案：
If you prefer a more diplomatic answer, here it is:
造成当前中加关系困难局面的责任完全在于加方。
Canada is entirely responsible for current difficulties in China-Canada relations.
解铃还须系铃人。
Whoever started the trouble should end it.
我们奉劝加方正视中方的严正立场和关切，纠正错误，立即释放孟晚舟女士，让她平安回到中国。
We urge Canada to take China's solemn position and concerns seriously, correct its mistake, and immediately release Ms. Meng Wanzhou back to China.
至于加方一直纠缠的两名加拿大公民的个案，这两人涉嫌从事危害中国国家安全的活动，已经由中国的侦查机关侦查终结，并按法律规定移交检察机关审查起诉。
As to the cases involving two Canadian citizens that Canada keeps bringing up, they are suspected of conducting activities that endangered China's national security. Investigation on the two cases has been completed and they have been transferred to the procuratorial authority for prosecution following legal procedures.
问：普京总统昨天在记者会上表示，美日韩之间是军事同盟关系，但俄罗斯没有同中国建立军事同盟，也不打算建立。
I want to follow up on President Putin's press conference yesterday. He said that US, Japan and the ROK are trying to create some kind of military alliance in Asia, but China and Russia have no plan to do so.
考虑到当前全球的形势，你是否认为俄中有建立某种军事联盟的必要？
Taking into account the current global situation, do you think there is any necessity for China and Russia to create some kind of military alliance?
答：70年来，中俄关系的发展经历了国际风云变幻的考验，也显示出强大的生命力和广阔的发展前景。
China-Russia relations have shown strong vitality and broad prospects after weathering the changing international landscape throughout the past seven decades.
中俄关系是当今世界结伴而不结盟、对话而不对抗、密切合作的新型大国关系典范。
Our relations have become an example for a new type of major-country relations featuring close cooperation, partnership instead of alliance and dialogue instead of confrontation.
新时代中俄全面战略协作伙伴关系，是当今世界上互信程度最高、协作水平最高、战略价值最高的一对大国关系。
The China-Russia comprehensive strategic partnership of coordination for a new era has become a major-country relationship featuring the highest degree of mutual trust, the highest level of coordination and the highest strategic value.
这种关系不针对第三方，同时也不会受第三方干扰。
It does not target any third party and will not be affected by any third party.
中方愿同俄方一道，继续落实好两国元首达成的各项共识，推动中俄新时代全面战略协作伙伴关系不断向前发展。
China stands ready to work with Russia to continue implementing our leaders' consensus for fresh progress in the China-Russia comprehensive strategic partnership of coordination for a new era.
问：你刚刚发布了中印边界问题特别代表第22次会晤即将举行的消息，能否介绍具体安排？双方究竟会谈及哪些“边界问题”？
You announced the 22nd round of the China-India Special Representatives Talks on China-India Boundary Question. Can you elaborate the arrangements and specify what constitutes the boundary question to be discussed?
答：中印边界问题特别代表会晤是两国边界谈判的主要渠道和战略沟通的重要平台。
The Meeting of the Special Representatives of China and India on the Boundary Question is the main channel for boundary negotiations and an important platform for strategic communication between the two countries.
按照惯例，每年在两国轮流举行。
Following established practice, the venue to host this annual event alternates between the two countries.
双方的特别代表将会按照两国领导人共识精神，就边界划界、边境管控和务实合作等议题进行深入沟通，寻求解决边界问题的方案。
Special representatives from the two sides will follow leaders' consensus and have in-depth discussions over such issues as boundary delimitation, boundary and border administration and control, and practical cooperation to seek solutions to the boundary question.
双方还会就共同关心的双边和国际地区问题交换意见。
They will also exchange views over bilateral, regional and international issues of mutual interest.
具体情况中方会及时发布消息。
More information will be released to you in due course.
2019年12月19日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on December 19, 2019
问：据报道，12月18日，美国会众院外委会审议通过“2019年西藏政策及支持法案”，中方对此有何评论？
Reports say that the US House Foreign Affairs Committee passed the Tibetan Policy and Support Act of 2019 on December 18. Do you have any comment?
答：美国会众院外委会审议通过“2019年西藏政策及支持法案”，严重违背国际法和国际关系基本准则，粗暴干涉中国内政，向“藏独”势力发出错误信号。
The US House Foreign Affairs Committee passed the Tibetan Policy and Support Act of 2019 in serious violation of international law and basic norms governing international relations. It blatantly interferes in China's internal affairs and sends a wrong signal to the "Tibet independence" forces.
中方对此表示强烈不满和坚决反对，并已向美方提出严正交涉。
We made representations to the US and expressed deploring and strong opposition.
中方在涉藏问题上的政策和立场是一贯的、明确的。
China's policy and position on Tibet-related issues is clear and consistent.
西藏事务纯属中国内政，不容任何外部势力干涉。
Tibetan affairs are our internal affairs that allow no foreign interference.
美方有关法案对中方的指责罔顾事实、充满偏见，我们绝不接受。
The US bill accuses China in an unfounded and biased way. We cannot accept that.
我们敦促美方充分认识涉藏问题的高度敏感性，恪守在涉藏问题上对中方作出的承诺，停止利用涉藏问题干涉中国内政，停止推动相关法案。
We urge the US to fully recognize the highly sensitive nature of Tibet-related issues, honor its commitments to China, and stop pushing that bill or using those issues as a pretext to interfere in China's domestic affairs.
问：请问美国国务院对朝政策特别代表史蒂芬·比根会在访华期间在北京会见朝鲜官员吗？另外，中方会向比根传递什么信息？
Will US Special Representative Stephen Biegun to North Korea meet DPRK officials in Beijing? What is China's message to Biegun?
答：今天下午，中方主管官员将会见比根特别代表。
Chinese officials will be meeting Special Representative Biegun this afternoon.
会见后，中方将会发布消息，请你届时关注。
You may read our press release that's going to be published after the meeting.
问：我们注意到，近日葡萄牙领导人就澳门回归中国20周年发表评论。
Portuguese leaders recently made some comments on the 20th anniversary of the return of Macao to China.
你对此有何回应？
Do you have any comment on their remarks?
答：近日，葡萄牙总统德索萨、总理科斯塔分别以向中国国家主席习近平致信和向媒体发表声明的方式，表达葡方对澳门回归中国20年来取得的经济社会发展成就和“一国两制”在澳门成功实践的高度赞赏，表示相信葡中关系将继续成为不同政治制度与文化传统国家和谐共处的独特范例，澳门将继续为葡中全面战略伙伴关系发展作出更大贡献。
The Portuguese President Marcelo Rebelo de Sousa sent a letter to President Xi Jinping and Portuguese Prime Minister António Costa made a statement to the media. They both highly commended the economic and social development as well as the successful implementation of the "one country, two systems" principle in Macao over the past 20 years since its return to China. They believe that Portugal-China relations will continue to serve as a unique example of countries with different political systems and cultural traditions co-existing in harmony, and that Macao will make greater contributions to the comprehensive strategic partnership between Portugal and China.
中方赞赏葡萄牙领导人的上述积极表态和对中葡关系的美好期待。
We appreciate the Portuguese leaders' positive remarks and best wishes for China-Portugal relations.
澳门回归20年来，“一国两制”、“澳人治澳”、高度自治方针得到全面贯彻落实，澳门取得的成就和进步举世瞩目。
Over the past two decades, principles of "one country, two systems", "Macao people governing Macao" and a high degree of autonomy have been faithfully implemented. Macao's remarkable progress has been there for all to see.
中葡双方基于友好和互信妥善解决澳门问题，为国际社会树立了良好示范。
By properly resolving the question of Macao in the spirit of friendship and mutual trust, China and Portugal set a good example for the world.
中方愿同葡方一道，继续推动中葡关系不断取得新的发展。
China stands ready to work with Portugal to achieve greater progress in our bilateral relations.
问：据报道，安理会正就叙利亚跨境人道救援授权延期决议草案进行讨论，目前各方分歧较大，中方对此有何评论？
According to media reports, the UN Security Council is discussing draft resolutions on extending authorization of humanitarian aid cross-border deliveries to Syria. There are major differences at the moment. What's China's comment?
答：中方高度重视叙利亚人道局势，多年来在力所能及基础上为叙提供大量人道援助。
China attaches high importance to the humanitarian situation in Syria and has provided a large amount of humanitarian aid to the best of our capabilities for many years.
同时，中方一贯认为，对叙人道救援应充分尊重叙主权、独立、统一和领土完整，充分听取叙政府意见。
That said, we believe humanitarian aid to Syria should be based on full respect for Syria's sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity, and the Syrian government's views on that should be heeded.
目前，安理会各方正就有关决议草案进行协商，中方积极参与了有关讨论，并将继续为推动各方弥合分歧、达成一致作出自己的努力。
At the moment, consultations are being held in the Security Council over the draft resolutions. China has been taking an active part in the discussions and will continue to bridge differences towards a consensus.
问：据报道，一名中国女性因非法进入美国总统特朗普位于佛罗里达州的海湖庄园而被美方逮捕。
Can you confirm reports that a female Chinese national was arrested for illegally entering US President Trump's Mar-a-Lago resort in Florida?
你能否证实？如报道属实，能否介绍该女子被逮捕的原因？能否介绍她的身份？
If so, can you say what this person is charged with? Can you confirm her identity?
答：目前，我还不了解具体情况。
I'm not aware of the specific situation at this moment.
我能告诉你的是，中国政府一贯要求海外中国公民遵守当地法律法规，不从事任何形式的违法活动。
I can tell you that the Chinese government asks overseas Chinese citizens to observe laws and regulations of host countries and not to engage in any form of illegal activities.
问：一个和足球有关的问题。
Got a question on football.
德国科隆足球俱乐部宣布暂停在华建设足球学校的计划。
The German Club of FC Cologne announced that they pulled out a deal to open a football academy in China, saying it was a sporting reason.
俱乐部方面称，这一决定完全出于体育考虑。但俱乐部理事会的一位成员表示并非如此，而是因为中国是集权、独裁的国家。
But one member of the club council justified the decision by saying that China is a totalitarian dictatorship.
你对此有何评论？中方会采取什么措施来应对这些批评吗？
What's your reaction and what steps does China want to take in response to such criticism?
答：你提到的具体情况我不了解。
I'm not aware of that specific case.
有关体育交流合作方面的事宜，建议你向主管部门了解。
I'd refer you to the competent authorities for sports exchange and cooperation.
至于你刚才提到德方有关人士的说法，那绝对是一派胡言。
Also, the comments from the German side you quoted are pure nonsense.
问：据报道，美国总统特朗普遭到了弹劾，他成为了美国历史上第3位被弹劾的总统。
With the recent impeachment vote, President Trump became the third ever US president to be impeached.
虽然我知道这是美国内政，但国际社会对此高度关注，我想问问中方有何评论？
Although this is an internal affair, the international community is paying close attention. What's your comment?
答：其实你已经替我作了回答。
The answer is already in your question.
这是美国内政，我们不作评论。
It is America's internal affair, and I have no comment on that.
2019年12月18日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on December 18, 2019
问：昨天，中国和俄罗斯向联合国安理会提交有关朝鲜半岛问题的决议草案，要求解除部分对朝制裁。
Yesterday China and Russia proposed a draft resolution to the UN Security Council on the Korean Peninsula issue, asking for the lift of part of the sanctions on the DPRK.
据报道，美国务院对朝政策特别代表比根将于明后两天访华。
Also, reports say US Special Representative for North Korea Biegun will be visiting China tomorrow and the day after that.
中方官员会同比根重点探讨哪些话题？
What will you discuss?
答：中方欢迎比根特别代表来华就朝鲜半岛问题进行沟通。
We welcome Special Representative Biegun's visit to China on the Korean Peninsula issue.
中方有关官员将与其会见，有关情况中方会及时发布消息，请你保持关注。
He will be meeting with Chinese officials. We will update you with more details in due course.
问：据报道，美国政府特别是美商务部正在完善有关限制向中国出口尖端科技的规定，包括量子计算、3D打印等技术。
The American government, specially the Commerce Department is finalizing a set of rules that could limit exports of high-tech products to China, including tech related to quantum computing and 3D printing.
外交部对此有何评论？
What's the foreign ministry's comment on this?
答：我看到了有关报道。
I noted media reports on that.
中方坚决反对美方泛化国家安全概念，滥用出口管制措施，干涉、限制企业之间正常的交往与合作。
The Chinese side firmly opposes the US over-generalizing the concept of national security, abusing export control measures, and interrupting and impeding exchange and cooperation between companies.
我们敦促美方多做有利于促进中美互信与合作的事，而不是相反。
We urge the US to enhance, instead of undermining mutual trust and collaboration between the two countries.
这里我还要说一下，美方不要以为限制对华出口尖端科技能够阻止中国的科技创新，能够迟滞中国的发展进步。
There's something more I want to say to the US side. Don't think you can ever deter China's growth as well as scientific and technological innovation by limiting exports of high-end technologies to us.
他们有些太自以为是了。
You are being too arrogant.
我可以告诉他们，新中国成立70年来取得的伟大成就，是中国人民自力更生、艰苦奋斗、流血流汗拼搏出来的。
In the past 70 years after the establishment of the PRC, all our glorious achievements were made by the independent, gritty and hard-working Chinese people with painstaking efforts.
无论美方限制也好、干扰也好、破坏也好、封锁也好，对中方都造不成太大的困扰，暂时的一些挫折只会激发中国人民的聪明才智和昂扬斗志。
Restriction, disturbance, sabotage and blockade from the US side will not be a major problem for us. They are temporary setbacks that will only make us more intelligent and ambitious.
我们对中国的科技进步和中国的发展壮大充满信心。
We have full confidence in the future of China's science, technology, growth and strength.
问：国务委员兼外交部长王毅刚刚结束了对欧盟的访问，这也是他今年第二次率团到访布鲁塞尔。
State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi just concluded his trip to the European Union, which was also his second visit to Brussels this year as head of the Chinese delegation.
中方如何评价此次访问？对中欧关系未来发展有何展望？
How do you view his visit and the future of China-EU relations?
答：今年是中欧关系取得丰硕成果的一年。
This year has been a productive year for China-EU relations.
王毅国务委员此次访问欧盟总部正值新一届欧盟机构正式就职不久，双方进行了深入沟通，对外发出了深化中欧全面战略伙伴关系，共同维护多边主义和国际秩序、应对全球挑战的积极信号。
It was not long before State Councilor Wang Yi's visit that the new EU leadership took office. Their in-depth discussions sent a positive signal to the world of deepening China-EU comprehensive strategic partnership, jointly upholding multilateralism and international order and addressing global challenges.
概括起来讲，此次访问传递出中方对发展中欧关系的三个“始终如一”：
It demonstrates "three alwayses" in China's vision.
第一，中方重视欧洲的态度始终如一。
-As always, China values Europe.
中方一贯以积极、正面的心态看待欧洲，一贯把欧洲视为重要合作伙伴和中国外交的优先方向之一。
China views Europe's development in a positive manner and sees it as our major cooperative partner and one of China's diplomatic priorities.
我们坚定支持欧洲一体化进程，坚定支持欧盟团结壮大，坚定支持欧洲在国际事务中发挥更大作用。
We firmly support the European integration process, the unity and growth of the EU, and a bigger role for Europe to play in international affairs.
中欧之间没有根本利害冲突，是互利的合作伙伴，而不是零和的竞争对手。
Between China and Europe there are no fundamental conflicts of interests. We are partners for win-win cooperation, not rivals in a zero-sum competition.
中国对欧政策具有高度稳定性和连续性。我们相信新一届欧盟机构也会保持对华政策的延续性和前瞻性，积极发展对华关系。
As China's EU policy has been highly stable and consistent, we believe the EU institutions under the new leadership will keep to EU's China policy that is consistent and forward-looking, and continue to advance China-EU relations.
第二，中方推进中欧务实合作的决心始终如一。
-As always, China is determined to boost China-EU practical cooperation.
今年中欧双方签署了民用航空领域重要协定，完成了中欧地理标志协定谈判，“一带一路”与欧盟欧亚互联互通战略对接也在顺利推进当中。
This year we signed agreements on aviation cooperation, concluded negotiations on the Geographical Indications (GI) agreement, and made good progress in enhancing the complementarity between the Belt and Road Initiative and the EU's Strategy on Connecting Europe and Asia.
在全球经济下行压力加大的背景下，中欧双方经贸合作依然逆势而上，交出了不俗的成绩单。
Though faced with global economic downward pressure, economic and trade cooperation between China and the EU has bucked the trend and kept growing.
中方愿与欧方进一步强化优势互补，打造中欧绿色伙伴、数字伙伴和自贸伙伴关系，促进双方经济社会的发展和民众福祉的提升。
China would like to work with the EU to enhance synergy of our respective strengths, foster partnerships for green, digital development and free trade, which will contribute to our economic growth, social development and people's wellbeing.
第三，中方致力于加强中欧全球事务协调、共同维护多边主义的立场始终如一。
-As always, China is committed to strengthening China-EU coordination in global affairs and safeguarding multilateralism with the EU.
面对保护主义、单边主义逆流，中欧作为当今世界两支重要力量，绝不能袖手旁观，必须携手应对，展现责任担当。
Facing the headwinds of protectionism and unilateralism, as two major world forces, China and the EU cannot simply stand by. We must take on our responsibility and deal with it together.
双方应始终高举多边主义旗帜，在坚持维护自由贸易、完善全球治理、应对气候变化等领域继续加强协调合作，为世界持续提供稳定性、开放性和正能量。
We need to stay committed to multilateralism, enhance coordination and collaboration in upholding free trade, improving global governance and addressing climate change, and make the world a more stable and open place with greater positive energy.
明年是中国同欧盟建交45周年，双方将迎来一系列重要交往。
The year 2020 will mark the 45th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic ties between China and the EU, when a series of major bilateral events will take place.
中方愿同欧方一道，确保一系列重要政治日程取得成功，推动双方务实合作取得更多成果，规划好中欧合作的新蓝图，推动中欧和平、增长、改革、文明四大伙伴关系不断迈上新台阶。
China is ready to work with the EU to ensure the success of the items on our political agenda, work for more cooperation outcomes, draw a new blueprint for collaboration and take China-EU partnerships for peace, growth, reform and civilization to a new level.
问：美国会参议院通过2020财年国防授权法案，批准美成立太空部队。
US Senate passed the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020, approving the establishment of a space force.
答：中方注意到有关报道，这再次表明当前外空武器化和战场化风险日益上升，中方对此深感担忧。
We note reports on that. They serve to illustrate the rising risk of weaponization of outer space, which may turn it into a new theater of warfare. China is deeply concerned about that.
外空是全人类的共同财富，确保外空和平利用，防止外空武器化和军备竞赛，不仅符合各国共同利益，也是各国共同责任。
Outer space is a shared asset of all mankind. It serves the interests and is the shared responsibility of all countries to ensure the peaceful use of the outer space and to prevent its weaponization and arms race in the outer space.
当前形势下，谈判达成外空军控国际法律文书的必要性和紧迫性进一步上升。
Under current circumstances, there is greater relevance and urgency to initiate negotiation of a legally-binding instrument on outer space arms control.
问：过去这一年可能对中国来说充满挑战，比如说中美经贸摩擦，但另一方面中方也取得了很多令人振奋的成就。
This year has been a challenging year for China in many ways, for instance, the trade frictions with the US. And on the other hand, many would say China has made impressive progress.
你如何评价今年中国外交？
How would you characterize this year in terms of China's relations with the world?
答：你在中国呆得时间挺久的，应该知道岁末年终是我们盘点一年收获并对来年工作进行规划展望的时候。
As you have been in China for a long time, you may know that at each year end we review the achievements in the past year and plan for the next one.
这里我做个广告，根据惯例，王毅国务委员兼外长年终一般都会接受中国媒体采访，对当年中国外交进行回顾和总结，对明年工作进行展望。
Here's a plug for our foreign ministry. It is a tradition for State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi to do the reviewing and planning for China's diplomacy in a press interview around this time each year.
请你保持关注，很快就能听到王毅国务委员的权威声音。
Stay tuned, and I believe you will hear an authoritative answer from State Councilor Wang Yi soon.
问：上周五中方召开了关于中美经贸第一阶段协议的新闻发布会，我想问的是，美方表示中方同意明后年增加购买2000亿美元的美国商品，其中包括400到500亿美元的农产品，但中方并未证实。
I have a question following on last Friday's press conference with Chinese officials. The US has said China agreed to buy $200 billion extra in US exports in the next two years including $40 to 50 billion worth of agricultural products. China hasn't confirmed these numbers yet.
你能否证实这是中美双方达成协议的一部分？另外中美双方何时签署第一阶段协议？莱特希泽称双方计划明年1月签署协议，并且协议将在签署30天后生效。
Can you confirm that is part of what China and the US agreed upon? Also, when will the signing happen? Robert Lighthizer said that they are planning for January with the agreement going into effect 30 days after that.
你对此有何评论？
Is that your understanding of this agreement?
答：上周五晚上，国新办举行了新闻发布会，中方有关部门的负责人就中美经贸第一阶段协议的相关问题回答了记者提问，包括你刚才提到的这两个问题，也就是中方增加自美采购以及双方何时签署第一阶段协议的问题。
Chinese officials in charge of this matter talked about that from the press on the China-US phase-one trade agreement in a press briefing held by the State Council Information Office last Friday night. They answered questions including the ones you asked, namely China's extra purchase from the US side and the timing of the signing of the phase-one trade deal.
当时中方有关部门负责人已经作出了回答，我目前没有更新的内容。
As those questions have already been answered by officials in charge, I have nothing to update you at the moment.
追问：就是我在那场记者会上提的相关问题，但当时中方好像没有给我答复。
Follow-up: I asked those questions at the press briefing and there was no answer from the officials.
你有没有进一步的消息可以提供？
Do you have anything further to add this time?
我刚才已经说了，我目前没有进一步的消息，也没有可以更新的内容。
As I said, I have no updates for you at the moment.
我收看了当时的记者会，中方有关部门负责人就此作出的回应还是包含不少信息的，你可以再仔细阅读一下。
I watched that press briefing and, as I recall, our officials responded to those questions with much content. Maybe you could read the press release again.
问：关于联合国安理会涉朝制裁的问题。请问中方是否要求解除对朝鲜海外劳工的制裁？
With the UN Security Council sanctions on DPRK, was there a formal request for the sanctions to be lifted on the DPRK labor overseas?
答：昨天，中俄在安理会散发了有关朝鲜半岛问题的决议草案。
The draft resolution on the Korean Peninsula issue distributed by China and Russia at the Security Council yesterday contains three major points, one of which is to lift part of the sanctions on the DPRK.
草案包括三项重要内容，其中一项就是要求部分解除对朝制裁，你可以再查一下有关内容。
Maybe you could read that again.
在我印象中，好像包括劳工这一项。
As I recall, it includes the content of labor.
2019年12月17日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on December 17, 2019
问：有消息称，中俄两国向联合国安理会提交了关于终止部分对朝制裁的决议草案，并呼吁重启六方会谈。
Sources say that China and Russia proposed a draft resolution to the Security Council to terminate part of the sanctions against the DPRK and called for resumption of the six-party talks.
你能否确认？中俄提交上述草案的原因是什么？
I wonder if you could confirm the existence of that resolution? Why did the two countries decide to propose such kind of resolution?
答：我可以在这里向你确认，北京时间17日凌晨，中国和俄罗斯向联合国安理会提交了关于政治解决朝鲜半岛问题决议草案，草案已散发给了安理会成员。
I can confirm that on the early morning of December 17 Beijing time, China and Russia proposed a draft resolution on the political settlement of the Korean Peninsula issue to the Security Council. The draft resolution was distributed to the Security Council members.
当前半岛形势处于重要敏感时期，政治解决的紧迫性进一步上升。
At present, the situation on the Korean Peninsula is in a critical and sensitive stage with greater urgency for political settlement.
国际社会应秉持客观公正立场，着眼长远和大局，进一步凝聚政治解决半岛问题的共识，延续来之不易的对话势头，防止半岛重新陷入紧张对抗，避免局势出现严重逆转。
The international community must take an objective and impartial position, act in the service of long-term interests and the greater good, gather consensus for political settlement, and sustain the hard-earned momentum for dialogue, to prevent a relapse of tensions and confrontations and head off a dramatic reversal.
安理会必须履行《联合国宪章》赋予的职责，就此采取切实举措。
The Security Council must fulfill its responsibilities prescribed in the UN Charter and take concrete actions.
中国始终坚持半岛无核化、坚持维护半岛和平稳定，坚持通过对话协商解决问题，坚持并行推进构建半岛永久和平机制和实现半岛无核化，主张均衡解决各方关切，尤其是朝方在安全和发展方面的正当、合理关切。
China is committed to upholding denuclearization, peace and stability on the Peninsula and resolving the issue through dialogue and consultation. We stand for advancing denuclearization in parallel with creating a lasting peace mechanism. We hold that parties' concerns, particularly the DPRK's legitimate and justified concerns in security and development, should be addressed in a balanced way.
基于上述立场，中国和俄罗斯共同在安理会提出政治解决半岛问题决议草案。
In light of the above, China and Russia jointly proposed a draft resolution to the Security Council on the political settlement of the Peninsula issue.
决议草案主要包括三方面内容：一是重申各方应致力于实现半岛无核化；二是敦促美朝继续对话，呼吁恢复六方会谈；三是决定根据朝鲜遵守决议情况，解除部分对朝制裁措施。
There are three major points in the draft. First, China and Russia reiterated that all parties need to stay committed to realizing denuclearization on the Peninsula. Second, we called on the United States and the DPRK to continue dialogue and resume the six-party talks. Third, some sanctions should be lifted in light of the DPRK's compliance with relevant resolutions.
我们希望安理会能够发出支持政治解决半岛问题的一致声音，鼓励美朝双方尊重彼此关切，展现灵活诚意，相向而行，落实新加坡联合声明共识，按照分阶段、同步走原则，尽快恢复对话接触，打破僵局，防止对话进程“脱轨”甚至“倒退”。
We hope the Security Council will speak unequivocally with one voice in support of political settlement and encourage the United States and the DPRK to respect each other's concerns, demonstrate flexibility and good faith, move towards each other, act on the consensus contained in the Singapore Joint Statement, and, by taking the phased and synchronized approach, break the deadlock and resume dialogue and engagement as soon as possible to prevent the dialogue process from "derailing" or "backpedaling".
中方希望安理会成员保持团结，承担起历史责任，支持中俄决议草案，共同推动半岛问题政治解决进程。
China hopes the Security Council members will stay united, honor our historical responsibilities, support the draft resolution proposed by China and Russia and jointly work for political settlement of the Peninsula issue.
中方愿与有关各方一道，继续为实现半岛无核化、维护半岛持久和平稳定积极作出努力。
China stands ready to continue working, along with all parties concerned, towards denuclearization, lasting peace and stability on the Peninsula.
问：第十四届亚欧外长会议刚刚在西班牙马德里落幕，王毅国务委员兼外长出席了此次外长会。
The 14th ASEM Foreign Ministers' Meeting (ASEM FMM14) just concluded in Madrid, Spain. State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi attended this meeting.
中方认为此次会议有何意义？对会议成果有何评价？
What do you think of the significance of this meeting and its outcomes?
答：第十四届亚欧外长会是在国际形势加速演变、不确定不稳定因素上升的背景下举行的一次重要多边会议。
ASEM FMM14 is an important multilateral meeting held against the backdrop of fluid international landscape and rising instability and uncertainties.
各方在维护多边主义、加强互联互通、推动解决地区和国际热点问题等方面达成了许多重要共识。
Important consensus was reached on upholding multilateralism, enhancing connectivity and resolving regional and international hotspot issues.
此次外长会的最大成果和亮点，是人口超过世界60%、GDP占全球近60%、贸易量接近全球70%的53个亚欧会议成员汇聚了支持多边主义的强大能量，发出了共迎全球挑战的时代强音。
The most significant outcome and highlight of this meeting is that 53 ASEM members, accounting for more than 60 percent of the world's population, nearly 60 percent of global GDP and close to 70 percent of global trade, voiced their strong support for multilateralism in the face of global challenges.
王毅国务委员在会上围绕“有效多边主义”这一会议主题，系统阐述了中方对于多边主义的立场主张，呼吁亚欧各国做捍卫多边主义的表率，认为多边主义的时代内涵应以合作共赢为目标，以公平正义为要旨，以有效行动为导向，坚定维护以联合国为核心的国际体系，以国际法为基础的国际秩序，以世贸组织为基石的多边贸易体制，反对滥用“长臂管辖”和单边制裁，反对搞技术封锁和数字霸权，反对制造科技鸿沟和发展脱钩。
Under the theme of "effective multilateralism", State Councilor Wang Yi expounded on China's position for multilateralism and called on countries in Asia and Europe to lead by example. He said that multilateralism in the context of our times should have win-win cooperation as the goal, equity and justice as the essence, and be action-oriented. We need to defend the UN-centered international system, the international order based on international law, and the multilateral trading system underpinned by the WTO. We should oppose the abuse of "long-arm jurisdiction", unilateral sanctions, technology blockade, digital hegemony, the creation of technological divide and decoupling.
中方的立场得到与会各方的广泛认同与支持。
China's position was broadly endorsed by representatives at the meeting.
与会的亚欧外长们强调，当前基于国际法的国际秩序正受到挑战，亚欧伙伴致力于维护多边主义和多极化，维护以世贸组织为核心的多边贸易体制，反对一切形式的保护主义，并呼吁尽快恢复世贸组织上诉机构的正常运作。
ASEM foreign ministers stressed that as the international order based on international law was being challenged, Asian and European partners are committed to multilateralism, a multi-polar world and the WTO-centered multilateral trading system. They expressed opposition to protectionism in all forms and called for the resumption of the WTO appellate body's normal functioning as soon as possible.
这充分反映了亚欧国家的共同决心和共同意志。
It is a strong testament to ASEM members' collective resolve and will.
我想指出，当今世界，越是面对共同挑战，越要捍卫多边主义。
Faced with common challenges in today's world, we need to defend multilateralism more than ever.
中国愿同亚欧各方一道，落实好此次外长会的共识与成果，继续高举多边主义旗帜，不断为世界和平与发展增添稳定性，注入新动能。
China will work with other ASEM members to carry forth the consensus and outcomes reached at this meeting, uphold multilateralism and consistently add stability and impetus to world peace and development.
问：美国防长埃斯珀表示，无论阿富汗有关各方是否达成和平协议，美方都可能从阿富汗撤军。
US Defense Secretary Esper said that they might withdraw troops from Afghanistan whether or not there's a peace deal.
中方是否认为美方此举可能不利于当前阿富汗局势并带来不稳定的因素？另外，之前推迟在华举行的阿富汗和平会议将何时举行？
Does China see this move as undermining the situation in Afghanistan and creating volatility? Second, Beijing was to host the Afghan peace talks which got delayed. Do you have any update on when that might take place?
答：关于美方从阿富汗撤军，我们注意到了有关报道。
We noted reports on US troops' possible withdrawal from Afghanistan.
中方一贯认为阿富汗问题应通过政治方式解决，坚定支持“阿人主导、阿人所有”的和平和解进程，支持阿富汗问题相关方加强对话，为阿富汗问题的最终解决创造条件。
China believes the Afghan issue should be resolved by political means. We firmly support the "Afghan-led, Afghan-owned" peace and reconciliation process. We support more dialogue between parties concerned to create conditions for the final settlement.
我们认为，各方采取的行动应有助于阿实现和平稳定。
Any action to be taken should be conducive to peace and stability in Afghanistan.
中方也愿意为此继续发挥积极和建设性作用。
China will continue to make constructive efforts on this issue.
至于你关心的阿富汗人内部会议，我记得此前你问过多次了，我也多次回答（记者点头）。
As for the intra-Afghan meeting that you are interested in, as I recall, you asked several times before and I responded to each of them.
我今天的答案没有太多变化：中方愿意在尊重阿富汗各方意愿的基础上，为阿各方对话交流提供平台，为推进阿和平和解进程提供助力。
My answer today may be familiar to you. Respecting the will of parties concerned in Afghanistan, China would like to contribute to the peace and reconciliation process by providing a platform for intra-Afghan talks in China.
目前中方正就在华举办有关会议同相关各方保持着沟通。
We are staying in contact at the moment.
问：挪威电信表示，不会将华为作为5G技术供应商，这是否会影响中挪自贸谈判？中方是否向挪方表达过关切？
Does the decision by Norway's Telenor not to use Huawei as the key technology provider for Norway's 5G network impair the FTA talks between Beijing and Oslo? Have you raised concerns with the Norwegian authorities?
答：中国—挪威自贸协定谈判符合双方共同利益。
The FTA negotiations between China and Norway serve the interests of both sides.
中方愿本着相互尊重、互惠互利的精神，与挪方继续推进自贸谈判进程，以实际行动支持经济全球化和自由贸易。
In the spirit of mutual respect and mutual benefit, China is willing to continue advancing the negotiation process, which is our action in support for economic globalization and free trade.
关于5G问题，中方的立场是一贯的，明确的。
On the 5G technology, China's position is consistent and clear.
希望挪威方面能够秉持客观公正态度，独立自主作出符合自身利益的选择，为中国企业提供开放、公平、公正、非歧视的营商环境。
We hope Norway will make its choice independently and objectively to serves it national interests and foster an open, fair, impartial and non-discriminatory business environment for Chinese companies.
问：16日，德国社民党同联盟党达成一份提案称，如电信设备供应商来源国存在不受监督的国家影响，且无法排除操纵或间谍活动，则应被排除在德核心网络之外。
Germany's Social Democrats (SPD) and coalition lawmakers on December 16 agreed a blueprint, which stipulates that telecoms equipment suppliers from countries where state influence cannot be monitored and manipulation or espionage cannot be ruled out should be excluded from Germany's core networks.
报道称，该提案遭到德政府反对，社民党决定于17日内部表决。
Reports say this proposal was rejected by the government, and the SPD decided to hold an internal vote on December 17.
答：德方对自身网络安全存在关切完全可以理解，尤其是考虑到德国曾有网络甚至领导人的手机遭受其他国家监听的惨痛经历。
It is understandable that Germany is having concerns about its network security, especially considering the country's bitter experience that its networks and even its leaders' cellphones have been eavesdropped by other countries.
但这里我要指出的是，安全关切应该建立在事实基础上，并保持在理性和合理的范围内，不应成为推行保护主义的借口，更不应把正常的经贸合作泛政治化或意识形态化。
But I'd like to point out that security concerns should be based on facts and kept within a rational and fair range. They cannot be an excuse for countries to practice protectionism and, even worse, to politicize or ideologize economic and trade cooperation.
我们注意到近来德国国内关于华为5G问题的讨论。
We noted the recent discussions in Germany on Huawei's 5G technology.
德方一些党派和人士企图以政治手段将中国企业排除在外的错误倾向令人担忧，这与德国一贯倡导的开放包容、公平竞争等市场经济精神背道而驰，将损害德国自身利益和德国的国际声誉。
It is a worrisome tendency and a wrong behavior that some parties and people in Germany are trying to exclude Chinese companies by political means. It goes against the market economy values of openness, inclusiveness and fair competition, values that Germany has always been advocating. And it will undermine Germany's own interests and international reputation.
中方在5G问题上的立场是一贯的，明确的。
China's position on the 5G technology is consistent and clear.
中国政府从未支持任何中国企业从事损害他国正当安全利益的活动，更没有任何法律要求企业安装后门或收集外国情报。
The Chinese government has never supported Chinese companies in undertaking activities that jeopardize other countries' legitimate security interests. No law in China has required companies to install backdoors or collect foreign intelligence.
开放是相互的。
Openness should be mutual.
中国将继续对包括欧洲企业在内的各国电信企业参与中国5G市场合作保持开放，同时我们也希望其他国家同样也能为中国企业提供一个开放、公平、公正、非歧视的营商环境。
As China continues to keep its door open for all telecoms enterprises, including European ones, in our 5G networks, we hope other countries could also foster an open, fair, impartial and non-discriminatory business environment for Chinese companies.
问：关于美国从阿富汗撤军的消息，已经传了一段时间了。
The withdrawal of troops by the US has been on the cards for some time.
我想问的是，如果美方从阿撤军，中国是否会同周边国家商讨如何应对？还有一个关于阿富汗政府和塔利班对话的问题。
Does China have a plan of action with neighbors to deal with the particular situation if the US withdraws its troops? Another question about talks between Taliban and the Afghan government.
此前，当美方想举办阿人对话时，塔利班方面曾拒绝同阿政府对话。
Taliban earlier refused to hold talks with the Afghan government when the US tried to do that.
那是否可以理解为，塔利班方面也尚未准备好参加中方拟举办的阿人内部会议？
Can we presume that Taliban was not ready for talks with the Afghan government proposed by the Chinese government?
答：关于美国从阿富汗撤军的问题，刚才我已经介绍了相关立场。
I stated my position on the US troops' possible withdrawal from Afghanistan.
我们支持阿问题相关方加强对话，为阿问题的最终解决创造条件。
We support more dialogue between parties concerned to create conditions for the final settlement.
我们也希望各方采取的行动有助于阿实现和平稳定。
Any action to be taken should be conducive to peace and stability in Afghanistan.
中方的这一立场是非常明确的。
Our position on that is very clear.
至于你提到的阿人内部对话，我刚才在回答其他记者提问时已经说过了，中方一直就在华举办有关会议同相关各方保持沟通。
On the intra-Afghan talks in China, as I said earlier to another friend from the press, we are discussing that with parties concerned.
如果有这方面的消息我们会及时发布。
We will update you if anything comes up.
问：关于中俄联合向安理会提交决议草案的问题。
Just a follow-up question on the draft resolution proposed by China and Russia to the Security Council.
你是否知道安理会何时将就此进行表决？一个月后？一周后？
Do you have any information yet on the timing of a vote on that? Any idea, a month, a week, anything like that?
答：刚才我已经说过了，北京时间今天凌晨，中国和俄罗斯向安理会提交了关于政治解决朝鲜半岛问题决议草案。
Like I said, on the early morning of today Beijing time, China and Russia proposed a draft resolution on the political settlement of the Korean Peninsula issue to the Security Council.
下一步，中俄双方将就草案与安理会成员交换意见，进行磋商。
We will discuss that with other Security Council members.
我们希望安理会成员能够就草案内容形成共识，能够承担起历史责任，共同推动半岛问题的政治解决进程。
Of course, we hope all members will reach a consensus, take on historical responsibilities and jointly work for political settlement of the Peninsula issue.
问：朝鲜方面将今年底设定为要求美国作出政策调整的最后期限。
Pyongyang has set a deadline of the end of this year for the US to change its policies.
中方对此怎么看？会就此向朝方传递什么信息吗？
I just wondered how China viewed that deadline? What will be your message to Pyongyang about the deadline?
答：我刚才回答其他记者提问时已经说过了，当前朝鲜半岛形势处于一个重要敏感时期，包括你刚才提到朝方最近一系列的表态。我想大家也都注意到了。
Like I responded earlier, the situation on the Korean Peninsula is in a critical and sensitive stage. You may have noticed the recent remarks made by the DPRK side.
在当前情况下，政治解决半岛问题的紧迫性进一步上升。
Currently there is greater urgency for political settlement.
也正是在这个背景下，中俄共同提交这份安理会决议草案。我们认为，国际社会应秉持客观公正立场，着眼长远和大局，进一步凝聚政治解决半岛问题的共识，能够延续来之不易的对话势头，防止半岛重新陷入紧张对抗，避免局势出现严重逆转。
Against this backdrop, China and Russia jointly proposed this draft resolution because we believe the international community need to be fair and unbiased, have the bigger picture in mind, further consolidate consensus on political settlement, sustain the hard-earned momentum for dialogue, prevent the resurgence of tension and confrontation, and head off a dramatic reversal.
这里我还要强调，朝美作为主要当事方，应当珍惜难得的政治解决半岛问题的机遇，珍视已经取得的成果，坚定地致力于对话协商，相向而行，早日打破对话的僵局。
Also, I'd like to emphasize that both the DPRK and the US, as parties directly concerned, should cherish the hard-won opportunity of political settlement as well as outcomes that have been achieved. Both sides need to stay committed to dialogue and consultation, meet each other halfway and break the deadlock at an early date.
中方愿意继续为此发挥建设性的作用。
China will continue to make constructive efforts on that.
中俄也将就我们共同提出的决议草案与安理会成员交换意见，希望各方能够在推动政治解决半岛问题上尽快达成共识。
China and Russia will discuss the draft resolution with other Security Council members. We hope members will reach consensus on advancing political settlement as soon as possible.
问：关于中日韩领导人会议，你是否还有进一步的消息？外交部是否会发布媒体报道注册的信息？
About the China-Japan-ROK summit, do you have more information on that? Also in terms of accreditation, will that information be coming from the foreign ministry?
答：你关心的中日韩领导人会议，此前中方已经发布了消息。
We released information on the China-Japan-ROK Leaders' Meeting before.
会议将于12月24日在四川成都举行。
The meeting will be held on December 24 in Chengdu, Sichuan Province.
目前中方正同韩方以及日方就会议的有关安排保持着密切沟通。
We are in close communication with Japan and the ROK regarding the specific arrangements.
关于媒体注册的具体事宜，我在会后了解一下，尽快给你答复。
As for the accreditation details, I will get back to you after the press conference as I need to know more about that.
问：还是关于涉朝决议草案的问题。草案中提到希望恢复六方会谈。
Another question on the Security Council draft resolution where China and Russia called for resumption of the six-party talks.
中方是否已准备好主办六方会谈？
I wonder if China is ready to be a host for the six-party talks?
答：我想大家都知道，在以往的六方会谈中，中方发挥了非常重要的、关键的、建设性的作用。
As we all know, China played a critical and constructive role in previous six-party talks.
基于以往六方会谈的成功实践，中国、俄罗斯等很多国家以及一些国际组织都在呼吁恢复六方会谈。
Considering the mechanism's success in the past, China, Russia and many other countries as well as international organizations are calling for its early resumption.
我想，恢复六方会谈能够为各方就半岛问题交换意见、增进互信、凝聚共识搭建一个有益的平台。
It will provide a valuable platform for parties to exchange views, enhance mutual trust and consolidate consensus.
事实上，中方一直就有关问题同各方保持着沟通。
In fact, China has been in communication with relevant parties on that.
我们希望看到这一天能够早日到来。
We hope the six-party talks will be resumed soon.
2019年12月16日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on December 16, 2019
应乌干达共和国、刚果共和国、塞内加尔共和国政府邀请，中共中央政治局委员、中央外事工作委员会办公室主任杨洁篪将于12月17日至22日对上述三国进行正式访问，就推进双边友好关系、推动落实中非合作论坛北京峰会成果以及共同关心的国际和地区问题交换意见。
From December 17 to 22, invited by the governments of the Republic of Uganda, the Republic of the Congo and the Republic of Senegal, Member of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee and Director of the Office of the Foreign Affairs Commission of the CPC Central Committee Yang Jiechi will pay official visits to Uganda, the Republic of the Congo and Senegal to discuss bilateral friendly relations, the implementation of the outcomes of the FOCAC Beijing Summit, and regional and international issues of mutual interest.
问：关于中美经贸第一阶段协议的问题。
A question on the phase-one trade deal between China and the US.
请问双方何时可以签署？美方表示明年一月初有望签署，你能否证实？协议会在哪里签署？由谁签署？
Can you tell us maybe when it will be signed? The US side said it should be in early January, can you confirm it and tell us where it will be signed and who will sign it?
答：上周五晚上，国新办举行新闻发布会，中方有关部门的负责人就中美经贸第一阶段协议问题回答了记者提问。当时，中方已经对外介绍了有关情况。
Chinese officials in charge of this matter talked about this and answered questions from the press on the China-US phase-one trade agreement in a press briefing held by the State Council Information Office last Friday night.
目前，中美双方还需要完成各自的法律审核、翻译核对等一些必要的程序，然后再商定协议签署的具体时间、地点和形式。
Our two sides still need to go through necessary procedures including legal reviewing and translation proofreading. After that, we will decide when, where and how we will sign it.
目前，双方工作层仍在就此进行协商。
Working-level discussions are still going on between China and the US.
如果有进一步的消息，中方会适时发布。
We will keep you updated if anything comes up.
问：《纽约时报》周末报道，美国政府“驱逐”了两名中国驻美使馆官员，理由是两人曾驾车进入弗吉尼亚州一敏感军事基地。
A New York Times report over the weekend said that the US government expelled two Chinese embassy officials after they drove onto a sensitive military base in Virginia.
报道称，这是美方30年多来首次以怀疑“间谍活动”为由驱逐中国外交官。
The article described it as the first expulsion of Chinese diplomats suspected of espionage in more than 30 years.
你对此有何评论？
Can you comment on that?
答：美方对中方人员的指责严重违背事实。
The US accusation on our officials is completely inconsistent with the truth.
中方已就此向美方提出了严正交涉和抗议。
We made stern representations and protests to the US side.
我们强烈敦促美方纠正错误，撤销有关决定，保护中方外交人员依据《维也纳外交关系公约》所享有的正当权益。
We urge the US to correct its mistake, withdraw this decision and protect Chinese diplomats' legitimate rights and interests according to the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations.
这里我们愿意提醒美方，国家间根据《维也纳外交关系公约》给予彼此外交人员工作便利和保障是建立在相互基础上的。
We'd like to remind the US that it is a reciprocal process for countries to grant work-related convenience and guarantee to foreign diplomats following the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations.
问：联合国秘书长古特雷斯对气候变化马德里会议结果表示失望，称各国错失了机会。
UN Secretary-General António Guterres was disappointed by the climate change conference in Madrid, saying it's a lost opportunity.
会议期间，许多国家相互指责，也有个别国家及活动人士批评中、印两国没有进一步落实减排任务。
A lot of countries blamed each other. Some countries and activists blamed China and India for not improving their current emission reduction plans.
中方对此有何评论？是否认为应有国家对会议结果负责？
What's China's take on the summit? Should anyone be responsible for this lost opportunity?
答：《联合国气候变化框架公约》第25次缔约方会议在延期两天后闭幕。
The COP 25 to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) concluded after a two-day postponement.
由于在关键问题上存在分歧，各方未能就核心议题达成共识，中方对此表示遗憾。
China regrets that parties failed to reach a substantive consensus on core issues due to differences on key points.
同时，我想指出的是，在美方退出《巴黎协定》的背景下，会议仍就公约、《京都议定书》和《巴黎协定》落实和治理事项通过30余项决议，包括坚持多边主义、反映各方气候治理共识的“智利马德里行动时刻”决议，并就如何落实《巴黎协定》第六条市场机制等问题作出了成系列的程序性安排。
But on the other hand, though the US has started withdrawing from the Paris Agreement, there were over 30 decisions adopted at the conference on matters regarding the UNFCCC, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement, which include the "Chile-Madrid Time for Action" decision that affirms multilateralism and climate action, as well as a series of procedural arrangement on matters relating to market mechanisms in Article 6 of the Paris Agreement.
中方认为，尽管会议取得的这些成果与国际社会期待有一定差距，但它也为下阶段各方达成实质性的共识奠定了基础。
Although these outcomes fall short of international expectation, China believes they have prepared the ground for a substantive consensus in the future.
此次会议期间，各方特别是发达国家和发展中国家在气候治理和责任分摊等问题上的立场差异比较突出，发达国家对发展中国家支持不足的问题日益严峻。
This conference marked disagreement especially between developed and developing countries on issues like climate governance and burden-sharing, and the increasingly severe lack of support from developed nations to developing ones.
我们呼吁发达国家加强新的、额外的、以公共资金为基础的支持，提高资金透明度，确保发达国家提供的支持力度与发展中国家行动力度相匹配。
We call on developed countries to strengthen new, additional support with public fund as a main source, increase financial transparency and make sure their support is commensurate with developing countries' actions.
同时，我们认为，要在2020年后实现《巴黎协定》设定的全球目标，需要在弥补现有缺口的基础上，由发达国家率先采取切实行动，形成可行的政策路径并与发展中国家分享。
At the same time, in order to achieve the global goals set by the Paris Agreement after 2020, while filling existing shortfalls, developed countries need to first take concrete actions, formulate viable policy approaches and share them with developing countries.
中国作为最大的发展中国家，虽然仍面临改善民生等艰巨发展任务，但始终积极承担符合自身发展阶段和国情的国际责任，采取实实在在的举措，百分之百地落实承诺，作出的贡献有目共睹。
As the biggest developing country, while facing difficult tasks such as improving people's lives, China has been actively fulfilling international responsibilities that are consistent with our development stage and domestic conditions, taking concrete police actions on climate change and implementing our commitments to the fullest extent. Our contributions are there for all to see.
去年，中国单位GDP二氧化碳排放比2005年下降45.8%，相当于减少二氧化碳排放52.6亿吨。
In 2018, China's carbon dioxide emissions per unit of GDP dropped by 45.8% compared to that in 2005, which equals the amount of 5.26 billion tons of carbon dioxide.
中国也是对可再生能源投资最多的国家，可再生能源装机占全球的30%，在全球增量中占比44%，中国新能源汽车保有量也占全球一半以上。
China's investment in renewable energy is larger than any other country. We have 30% of world's installed renewable energy capacity. In the same category, our increase is 44% of that globally. We have more than half of the world's electric cars.
另外我也要说，中方自始至终本着积极和建设性的态度，参与了此次马德里会议，为会议取得上述成果作出了积极贡献。
Also, China has been contributing to the achievements of the Madrid conference in an active and constructive manner.
这里我要强调，应对气候变化的当务之急是要继续高举多边主义旗帜，在坚持公平、共同但有区别的责任和各自能力原则基础上落实《巴黎协定》。
I'd like to emphasize that to deal with climate change, the urgent task is to uphold multilateralism and implement the Paris Agreement on the basis of equity and in accordance with all parties' common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities.
中方将继续与各方一道，努力推动《巴黎协定》实施细则“最后一公里”的谈判，进一步推动完善公平合理、合作共赢的全球气候治理体系，为构建人类命运共同体作出不懈努力。
Working with all parties, China will continue to push for the conclusion of the "last mile" of the negotiations on the implementation of the Paris Agreement, to improve a global climate governance system that is fair, equitable and mutually beneficial, and to contribute to building a community with a shared future for mankind.
问：保护记者委员会（CPJ）今日发布了一份关于中方在香港、台湾地区开展活动、影响渗透的报告，并称中国威胁报道自由。
CPJ, Committee to Protect Journalists, released a report today about China's influence and operations in Hong Kong and Taiwan and how it is threatening press freedoms.
报告还特别提到中方通过“商业权力”（commercial power）、拒发签证等手段来对媒体报道施加影响。
Specifically the report details China using its commercial power as well as visa denials to wield this influence.
中方对此有何评论？
Can you respond to the allegations in this report?
答：我还没有看到你提到的这份报告，但类似的组织发表类似的报告已经不是第一次了。
I haven't read this report, but it is not the first time for institutions like that one to publish such reports.
这些不实之辞根本不值一驳。
Those false words are not even worth refuting.
中方的新闻自由状况怎么样，凡是秉持客观公正立场的人，自然会有一个明确的判断。
Anyone with an objective and fair mind has a clear judgment on press freedoms in China.
问：你刚才提到，国家间根据《维也纳外交关系公约》给予彼此外交人员工作便利和保障是建立在相互基础上的。
You said it is a reciprocal process for countries to grant work-related convenience and guarantee to foreign diplomats following the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations.
这是否可以理解为，如果美方不撤销有关决定，中方也会考虑采取对等报复吗？中方也会驱逐美国外交官吗？
Does that mean if the US does not overturn this decision, there will be some sort of reciprocal punishment? Will China consider expelling US diplomats?
答：这是你刚才听了我的回答之后自己作出的解读。
This is only your interpretation of my answer.
我可以把我的回答再重复一遍：我愿在这里提醒美方，国家之间根据《维也纳外交关系公约》，给予彼此外交人员工作便利和保障，是建立在相互基础之上的。
Let me repeat myself. I'd like to remind the US that it is a reciprocal process for countries to grant convenience and guarantee to foreign diplomats following the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations.
问：关于德国足球运动员梅苏特·厄齐尔（Mesut ?zil）的问题。上周五，他在推特上发表了有关维吾尔族人的言论，在网上引发广泛热议。
A question on the German football player Mesut ?zil. He posted a message on Twitter on Friday about Uighurs, which triggered a lot of discussions online.
你对此有何回应？
What is your position on this tweet?
答：你应该注意到中国足协已就此表态。
You may have noticed the response by the Chinese Football Association.
我想，作为常驻中国的外国记者，你也应该了解普通中国民众对此事的反应。
As a stationed journalist in China, I believe you know the Chinese people's reaction to this.
新疆是中国领土不可分割的一部分。
Xinjiang has long been an inalienable part of China's territory and never been called "East Turkestan" in the Chinese history.
中国历史上从来没有把新疆称为“东突厥斯坦”，更不存在所谓的“东突厥斯坦国”。
In fact, there has never been a state known as "East Turkestan".
我不知道厄齐尔先生本人去没去过新疆，但他似乎被一些假新闻蒙蔽了双眼，被一些不实之辞影响了判断。
I don't know if Mr. ?zil has visited Xinjiang before, but he seems to be blindfolded by some fake news and his judgment was clouded by falsehoods.
他并不知道中国政府依法保护包括维吾尔族在内的中国公民的宗教信仰自由，不知道中国政府在新疆开展的反恐维稳措施得到当地各族民众的衷心拥护，不知道新疆已经连续3年没有发生暴恐事件。
What he doesn't know is that the Chinese government protects our citizens' freedom of religious belief, the Uighur ethnic group included, in accordance with law; that the measures taken by the Chinese government to fight terrorism and maintain stability in Xinjiang are endorsed by local people of various ethnic groups; that Xinjiang has not experienced a single terrorist attack for three years in a row.
我可以告诉他，中国新疆当前政治稳定、经济发展、民族团结、社会和谐，百姓安居乐业。
I want to tell Mr. ?zil that Xinjiang enjoys political stability, economic growth, ethnic solidarity and social harmony, and residents there are leading a happy life.
我们也欢迎厄齐尔先生有机会到新疆走一走、看一看，只要他怀有良知、明辨是非，秉持客观公正原则，就会看到一个“不一样”的新疆。
We welcome Mr. ?zil to visit Xinjiang and see the place with his own eyes. As long as he still has an unbiased mind and the conscience to tell the truth, he will see a Xinjiang different from what he thought it was.
追问：那你是否对阿森纳足球俱乐部以及英格兰足球超级联赛的回应感到满意呢？
Follow-up: Are you happy with the response from his club Arsenal and from the English Premier League to this incident?
答：你应该已经注意到中国足协就此作出了表态。
As I believe you noticed, the Chinese Football Association has responded to this matter.
我想作为常驻中国的外国记者，你也应该了解普通中国民众对此事的看法以及他们的反应。
As a journalist working in China, I think you know how the Chinese people view this and their reactions.
追问：中方已取消阿森纳足球俱乐部最近一场赛事的电视转播。
Follow-up: Already a game featuring Arsenal has not been televised on Chinese television.
你认为该球队或英格兰足球超级联赛的其他赛事在华的电视转播会遭到停播吗？
Do you expect this might happen again with this club or the English Premier League?
答：关于电视转播的具体问题，建议你直接向有关媒体询问。
I'll leave the specifics to the media agency concerned.
2019年12月13日外交部发言人华春莹主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Hua Chunying's Regular Press Conference on December 13, 2019
中日韩高官会将于12月13日在成都举行。
The China-Japan-ROK senior officials' meeting will be held in Chengdu on December 13.
会议将由中国外交部副部长罗照辉主持，韩国外交部次官补金健、日本外务审议官森健良与会。
Chinese Vice Foreign Minister Luo Zhaohui will chair the meeting and South Korean Deputy Foreign Minister Kim Gunn and Japanese Senior Deputy Foreign Minister Takeo Mori will attend the event.
三方将重点筹备第八次中日韩领导人会议，并就共同关心的问题交换意见。
The three parties will prepare for the 8th China-Japan-ROK Trilateral Summit and exchange views on issues of mutual interest.
问：美国务院亚太事务助理国务卿史达伟12日在美国战略与国际问题研究中心发表演讲称，美方为中国近几十年来的发展提供了巨大帮助，美方对中方以激进、持续的恶意来回应美方的善意感到失望。
In his speech at the Center for Strategic and International Studies on December 12, US Assistant Secretary of State for East Asia and the Pacific David Stilwell said the US has provided enormous assistance to China's development over the past decades but they are disappointed that China responded to their good faith with aggressive and consistent bad faith.
答：我们也看到了有关史达伟先生演讲的报道。
We read Mr. Stilwell's remarks.
恕我直言，我们完全不能同意他的观点。
Frankly we cannot agree with him.
他的说法不符合事实，企图以此为美现行对华错误政策正名，也是说不通的。
What he said was not the truth. And attempting to use it to justify wrong US China policies won't work.
首先，新中国成立70年来我们取得了举世瞩目的伟大成就，最根本的原因就是在中国共产党的坚强领导下，中国人民找到了一条符合自身国情的发展道路。
First, the fundamental reason for China's achievements in the past seven decades is that under the leadership of the CPC, the Chinese people found a development path that suits our national condition.
中国所取得的伟大成就是中国人民用自己的勤劳和智慧干出来的，不是靠任何人施舍的。
Our great achievements were made with our people's diligence and wisdom. They were not charity offered by anyone.
第二，中美合作是互惠互利的，不是单向的。
Second, cooperation between China and the US is mutually beneficial instead of benefiting only one side.
中美建交40年来，双方各领域务实合作不断拓展，给中美两国和两国人民都带来了巨大好处，美国也从中受益匪浅。对此，美方各界人士也是能够切身体会得到的。
Since our two countries established diplomatic ties 40 years ago, our bilateral cooperation has been expanding and delivering huge benefits to the two peoples. The US gained a lot from this process, which I believe American people from various sectors can all feel.
第三，史达伟先生多次提到了美方的善意，但是当美方在经贸、科技、人员交往等领域接连对中国无端设限和打压的时候，我们没有感受到美方的善意；当美方在香港、台湾、新疆、西藏、人权等涉及中国领土主权和民族尊严的核心利益问题上蓄意抹黑攻击中国的时候，我们丝毫没有感受到美方的善意；当美方在各种场合不遗余力地诋毁中国的社会制度、发展道路以及同其他国家的互利合作、给中国扣上种种莫须有的罪名的时候，我们没有感受到美方的善意。
Third, Mr. Stilwell talked many times about America's "good faith", but we don't feel "good faith" when the US wantonly restricts and oppresses China in economy, trade, science, technology and people-to-people exchange. We don't feel "good faith" when the US smears and attacks China on Hong Kong, Taiwan, Xinjiang, Tibet, human rights and other issues relating to China's core interests including territorial sovereignty and national dignity. And we don't feel "good faith" when the US slanders China's social system, development path and cooperation with other countries under various pretexts.
对于那些损害中国主权、安全、发展利益的错误言行，我们当然要予以坚决有力的回应。
We should definitely make strong responses to the wrong words and deeds that undermine China's sovereignty, security and development interests.
第四，当前中美关系面临严重的困难和挑战，说到底是美方不能客观理性地看待中国，不能正视和适应中国的快速发展。
Fourth, the root cause of serious difficulties and challenges in China-US relations is that the US cannot objectively view and adapt to the fact that China is developing rapidly.
正如王毅国务委员今天上午在2019年国际形势与中国外交研讨会演讲时所说，美方的一系列错误言行，归根到底是对华认知出现了误判，“中国观”走入了歧途。
Like State Councilor Wang Yi said this morning at the Symposium on the International Situation and China's Foreign Relations in 2019, US erroneous words and deeds originate from its wrong perception of China and its outlook on China has gone astray.
如果美方真心希望发展“良好、丰富和互利”的中美关系，就应该言行一致，而不是说一套做一套。
If the US truly wants to develop a China-US relationship that is "good, rich and mutually beneficial", it should match its words with deeds instead of being two-faced.
我愿重申，中方对美政策是一贯和明确的。
I'd like to reiterate that China's policy on the US is clear and consistent.
我们致力于同美方发展不冲突不对抗、相互尊重、合作共赢的关系，但这需要双方都作出积极努力。
We are committed to developing a China-US relationship featuring non-confrontation, non-conflict, mutual respect and win-win cooperation, but such a relationship takes efforts from both sides.
中方再次敦促美方政客摒弃陈旧过时的冷战思维，认真反思，纠正错误，回归理性，正确地看待和处理中美关系，停止干涉中国内政，停止损害中方利益，停止抹黑攻击中国，以便能够推动中美关系早日重回正轨。
Once again we urge the US to reject the outdated Cold-War mindset, reflect on and correct its mistakes, return to reason, view and handle China-US relations in a correct manner, stop interfering in China's internal affairs, undermining China's interests or smearing China, so that our bilateral relationship can return to the right track.
问：有报道称，今天，中国驻美大使崔天凯和美国贸易代表莱特希泽将签署第一阶段经贸协议。
Reports say that Chinese Ambassador to the US Cui Tiankai and the USTR Robert Lighthizer are expected to sign off on a phase one trade deal today.
你可否证实？中方是否已同意购买500亿美元农产品，以换取美方的关税减免？
Could you confirm whether such a signing-off ceremony has been planned? And has China agreed to buy US farm goods worth 50 billion dollars in exchange for a reduction in tariffs?
答：关于中美经贸磋商的具体情况，请向商务部门询问。
I'd refer you to the Commerce Ministry for specific questions regarding trade talks.
我注意到，有关中美已接近达成第一阶段经贸协议消息出来之后，美国三大股指及欧洲股市普遍上涨。
I noticed that the three major indexes in the United States and European stock markets soared across the board after the news came out that China and the US are close to a phase one deal.
这再次说明，中美通过磋商达成协议符合中美两国和各方利益，也是国际社会的普遍期待。
This again shows that negotiating a trade deal is in the fundamental interests of both China and the US and their people. It also serves the interests of the rest of the world and meets the aspiration of the international community.
中方在中美经贸磋商问题上的立场是一贯和明确的。
China's position on trade talks is consistent and clear.
我们始终致力于通过建设性对话解决和管控中美之间存在的分歧。
We remain committed to resolving and managing differences between China and the US through constructive dialogue.
我们始终坚持，磋商必须基于平等和相互尊重的原则，协议必须是互利共赢的。
We have always maintained that consultations must be based on the principle of equality and mutual respect, and the deal must be mutually beneficial.
问：据《纽约时报》报道，美国白宫国家贸易委员会主任纳瓦罗近日向华盛顿学者圈发送了一条备忘录，再次以虚构专家“罗恩·瓦拉”的身份为其继续对中国商品加征关税的立场辩护。
According to New York Times reports, White House trade adviser Peter Navarro cited the fictional expert Ron Vara to defend more US tariffs on Chinese goods in a memo that is circulated to Washington scholars.
纳瓦罗证实了这一备忘录的真实性。
Navarro confirmed the authenticity of the memo.
此前，CNN等美国多家媒体曾曝出，纳瓦罗在其多部书中多次引用并不存在的虚构人士“罗恩·
CNN and other media agencies previously revealed that this fabricated expert was quoted by Navarro to criticize China in his many books, which triggered strong responses and astonishment worldwide.
瓦拉”的言论批评攻击中国，令国际社会感到哗然和震惊。
What's your comment?
你对此怎么看？
China and the US are both major countries in the world.
答：中美都是世界上的重要大国，在影响中美关系和全球经济的重大问题上，纳瓦罗作为美国政府高官，反复用一个虚构的人物误导舆论，甚至试图推动以此为依据制定对华强硬政策，是非常荒谬和极不负责任的。
On such a major issue that bears on China-US relations and the global economy, it is absurd and highly irresponsible for Mr. Navarro, a senior US official, to mislead public opinion and formulate hardline China policy by repeatedly quoting a fictional character.
正如你刚才提到的，前不久有媒体曝出来，“罗恩·瓦拉”这个虚构人物在纳瓦罗的至少6本书中反复出现。
As you said, not long ago, media reports revealed that this fabricated expert Ron Vara was cited in at least six books by Navarro.
此时“罗恩·瓦拉”这个虚构人物重现江湖，非常蹊跷。
It's all the more odd that this fictional figure appeared again at this particular point.
大家都知道，现在大家非常关注中美可能即将达成第一阶段经贸协议，而且受这一消息影响，美国欧洲股指都在上涨，对此消息作出积极反应。
You know that a lot of attention is on the news that China and the United States may be close to a phase one deal, with US and European stock markets all up. That means a positive response from all.
而这个时候，纳瓦罗再次通过“罗恩·瓦拉”这样一个虚构的人物释放与各方期待和美国政府官方矛盾的信息，不清楚他居心何在？意欲何为？
But at this particular moment, Navarro sent out a signal contradicting the US government, what is he up to?
问：美国证实其成功试射一枚受美俄《中导条约》禁止的导弹。
The US confirmed it successfully tested a missile banned by the INF Treaty with Russia.
答：中方注意到有关报道。
We note relevant reports.
自8月2日美宣布正式退出《中导条约》以来，美国防部已先后进行了两次陆基中导试验。
Since the US announced its official withdrawal from the INF Treaty on August 2, the Department of Defense has conducted two land-based intermediate range missile tests.
美国防长埃斯珀骄傲地声称，美国从今年2月就已经开始着手准备相关试验。
Defense Secretary Esper said proudly that the US had been preparing for the tests since February.
请注意，美国是从8月2日正式宣布退出《中导条约》的，但是美国防长宣称美国从今年2月起就已经开始着手准备相关试验。
I want to draw your attention on this. The US officially withdrew from the INF Treaty on August 2, but the defense secretary said it had been preparing for the tests since February.
这又再次印证了我们此前的判断，美国退约早有预谋，真实目的是通过“自我松绑”放手发展先进导弹，谋求单方面军事优势。
This once again confirms our judgment that the US withdrawal is a premeditated decision. The real aim is to free itself to develop advanced missiles and seek unilateral military advantage.
美方上演的“俄罗斯违约”和“中国导弹威胁”的把戏，不过是其欺骗别人的拙劣表演。
The US has been highlighting the so-called Russian violations and Chinese missile threat. These tricks are nothing but clumsy distractions.
我们认为，国际社会应擦亮眼睛，认清美国接连毁约退群、频繁射导的险恶用心及其消极影响，共同维护好现有的国际军控体系。
The international community should be clear-eyed on the malicious intention and negative impact of the US withdrawal and tests. We should work in concert to safeguard the existing international arms control system.
我们也奉劝美方摒弃冷战思维和零和博弈的过时观念，多做有利于维护全球战略平衡与稳定、有利于国际和平安全的事。
We also advise the US to discard its Cold-War and zero-sum game mentality and contribute to global strategic balance and stability and international peace and security.
问：近日，《南华早报》报道称，根据美国媒体独立监督组织“公正与准确报道”（FAIR）的研究报告显示，尽管今年智利等地都爆发了大规模暴力抗议，但《纽约时报》、CNN等媒体却只对发生在香港的暴力活动表示出不同寻常的关注。
According to South China Morning Post, a study by Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting, an independent US media watchdog, reveals that The New York Times and CNN show disproportionate focus on Hong Kong against other places though it's the year of violent protests around the world.
报告显示，《纽约时报》记者称他们看到香港暴徒制造了成百上千的炸弹，但他们在报道中仍将这些武装分子称作“支持民主的活动分子”。
The Times' reporters describe seeing the rebels producing "hundreds or thousands of bombs" they were going to use. Despite this, the paper continued to describe the radicals as "pro-democracy activists".
美国媒体在涉港报道中经常粉饰暴力细节，很少对暴徒使用负面语言。
US news media have routinely glossed over the more violent and grisly details of the Hong Kong protests and rarely use negative language.
此外我们也注意到，中国国际电视台近期推出的新疆反恐纪录片被视频社交网站优兔以涉嫌违规为由下架停播。
We also noted that YouTube is removing CGTN documentaries on terrorism in Xinjiang for so-called rules violation.
此前，脸书、推特等社交平台以“有官方背景”为由关闭了上万个中国内地及香港的账户，但对一些发布香港极端暴力分子抗法行为或散播香港警察不实消息的账户未采取任何措施。
Previously, Facebook and Twitter shut down tens of thousands of Chinese mainland and Hong Kong accounts which they claimed were government-backed. But they failed to take any measure against those accounts posting illegal violent behaviors of radicals in Hong Kong and spreading misinformation about Hong Kong police.
对此你有何评论？
What's your comment?
答：今天有《纽约时报》的记者来吗？（无人举手）最近一段时间以来，的确《纽约时报》制造了不少新闻，同时自己也成为了不少新闻的主角。
Is there a reporter from the New York Times here today? It is true that the New York Times has been making a lot of news lately, and so has itself been the subject of a lot of news.
我也注意到了你说的报道情况。
I noticed the reports you mentioned.
我今天上午还看到一则消息，根据香港创新及科技局方面公布的数据，香港警方2019年内曾621次要求相关社交平台删除针对香港警方的假新闻和未经证实的消息。
I also saw a piece of news this morning that according to the statistics released by the Innovation and Technology Bureau of the HKSAR, the Hong Kong police have asked relevant social media platforms 621 times in 2019 to remove fake news and unverified information targeting the Hong Kong police.
这些都明白无误地说明，美国一些媒体没有恪守最基本的新闻报道准则，也失去了最起码的社会公德和责任。
All these clearly show that some media in the United States do not abide by the baseline of news reporting and have lost all their social morality and responsibility.
媒体本来是应该坚持客观公正的，应该忠于事实真相的，应该维护社会公平正义的。
The media should have upheld social justice and fairness by objective, impartial and truthful reporting.
但是令人非常遗憾和可悲的是，我们看到，美国一些媒体并没有这么做，他们显然走到了一条非常错误的道路上。
But it is very regrettable and sad to see that some of the media in the US have failed to do so. They have apparently gone down a very wrong path.
这样的行为应当引起大家高度警惕，也应该立即得到纠正。
We should be on high alert to such behavior, which must be corrected immediately.
问：中方近期对美显示了强硬立场。
Listening to recent comments from the Chinese side, we feel this is very strong rhetoric.
与此同时，美方却声称中美正非常接近达成第一阶段经贸协议。
And at the same time there is rumblings in the US that they are very close to reaching a phase one trade deal.
在这一背景下，我们该如何理解？
How should we understand this in this particular context?
答：对于美方近来采取的一系列损害中方利益的言行，中方都第一时间表明了坚决反对的态度，并及时作出了有力回应。
In response to a series of US acts that undermine Chinese interests, we laid out our firm opposition right away and made strong responses.
同时，中方本着对中美两国人民负责、对国际社会负责的态度，寻求同美方进行建设性对话。
At the same time, acting with a sense of responsibility towards the Chinese and American peoples and the international community, we have been seeking constructive dialogue with the US side.
中美关系40年发展演变的最大启示，就是合则两利、斗则俱伤。
China-US relations in the past four decades have shown that both sides stand to gain from cooperation and lose from confrontation.
合作才是中美两国的最好选择，也是唯一正确的选择。
Cooperation is the best and only correct choice for the two countries.
正如王毅国务委员今天上午在2019年国际形势与中国外交研讨会上演讲指出的，美方的有关错误做法，归根到底是对华认知出现了误判，美国的“中国观”走入歧途。
Like State Councilor Wang Yi stated in his speech at the Symposium on the International Situation and China's Foreign Relations in 2019 this morning, the US wrong perception of China is the root cause for its erroneous and that the US outlook on China has gone astray.
希望美方尽快冷静下来，树立理性的“中国观”。
We hope the US will calm down and adopt a rational outlook on China as soon as possible.
2019年12月12日外交部发言人华春莹主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Hua Chunying's Regular Press Conference on December 12, 2019
应欧盟外交与安全政策高级代表博雷利、斯洛文尼亚副总理兼外长采拉尔邀请，国务委员兼外长王毅将于12月14日至17日赴西班牙出席第十四届亚欧外长会议、访问欧盟总部、斯洛文尼亚。
At the invitation of EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy Josep Borrell and Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs of Slovenia Miro Cerar, State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi will attend the 14th ASEM Foreign Ministers' Meeting in Spain and visit the EU Headquarters and Slovenia.
问：我们注意到，澳大利亚《金融评论报》刊登澳著名学者科伦文章，批评澳近期“中国威胁论”已演变成“红色恐惧偏执症”，指出澳当前涉华辩论几乎丧失全部理性和分寸，对华强硬被视为澳取悦美国的一种方式。
The Australian Financial Review published well-known scholar James Curran's article, criticizing that the "China threat" rhetoric has now morphed not only into a classic red scare but also a paranoid syndrome in Australia. The China debate is close to losing all sense of rationality and proportion.

Australia's toughness towards China is now seen as a credible way of winning kudos in American eyes.
美国知名学者和媒体人扎卡里亚也在美《外交事务》杂志发表《新的中国恐惧症——美国为何不应当对新挑战感到恐慌？》一文称，中国是当前在地缘政治和军事领域高度负责任的国家，与美形成巨大反差。
Famous American scholar and journalist Fareed Zakaria also said in his article "The New China Scare: Why America Shouldn't Panic About Its Latest Challenger" published in Foreign Affairs that, today's China is a remarkably responsible nation on the geopolitical and military front. It stands in stark contrast with the US.
对华发动冷战将严重拖累美经济，受益的只是美军工产业。
The costs of a cold war against China would be immensely distorting the US economy and further inflating the military-industrial complex.
西方必须接受中国在现行国际体系中扮演更重要角色，而不是不计成本孤立中国。
The West should accept China's increasingly important role in existing international system rather than isolate China at all costs.
答：我也注意到了你提到的这两篇文章。
I noticed these two articles you mentioned.
我们对科伦教授和扎卡里亚先生在涉华问题上坚持客观理性并且展现出见识和勇气表示赞赏。
We appreciate Professor Curran and Mr. Zakaria's courage and insight in their objective and rational remarks on China-related issues.
的确，就像文章当中提到的那样，现在有些西方国家政客和媒体似乎集体患上了“对华恐惧偏执症”，表现为“逢中必反”，对中国污蔑抹黑，无所不用其极，甚至黑白不分，是非颠倒，完全丧失了底线和良知。
Indeed, some politicians and media in western countries seem to be plagued by "China phobia and paranoia", which is manifested as backlash against China on all fronts. They slander and smear China in every possible way, confuse right with wrong and have lost their moral compass and conscience.
这种现象说到底，是对华认知出了问题，或者说，没有正确的“中国观”。
This phenomenon, in the final analysis, is boiled down to their problematic perception of China.
就像扎卡里亚先生说的那样，中国在世界政治、经济、军事等各领域都发挥着高度负责任的作用。
As Mr. Zakaria said, China plays a highly responsible role in world politics, economy and military affairs.
我们没有主动发起过战争，我们没有干预过别国内政，我们没有侵占过别国一寸领土，我们没有破坏过国际规则和秩序。
We have not initiated wars, interfered in others' internal affairs, occupied a single inch of other countries' territory, or violated international rules and order.
中国在政策上和行动上都光明磊落，坦坦荡荡。
We are open and aboveboard in our policies and actions.
我们只是通过自己的辛勤劳动和付出过上越来越好的生活，在中国主权安全受到威胁和侵害的时候，我们展现出更强的维护自身正当合法权益的能力和信心；在面对抹黑攻击时，更加及时有效地擦干净泼在我们身上的脏水。
We are just living a better and better life through our own efforts. When China's sovereignty and security are threatened or infringed upon, we have shown greater ability and confidence to safeguard our legitimate rights and interests. When others throw dirt on us, we are now able to wipe it off more swiftly and effectively.
我们进行必要的斗争，只是为了赢得我们应有的平等和尊严。
We fight the necessary battles just to win the equality and dignity we deserve.
中国块头是大，但块头大小与威胁与否并无必然联系。
China is big, but its size has nothing to do with threat.
熊猫块头很大，但是它比秃鹰更危险吗？即便是功夫熊猫也是行侠仗义、亲仁善邻，受到了伙伴们的喜爱。
A giant panda is big, but is it more dangerous than a bald eagle? And the Kung Fu Panda is adored by all as it is an amicable friend and justice defender.
“对华恐惧偏执症”的确是一种病，也非常危险，但并非无药可治。
"China-phobia" is a dangerous illness but it is not incurable.
它需要的只是抛弃冷战零和思维，秉持平等相互尊重，拥抱开放包容，实现互利共赢。
The prescription is to abandon the zero-sum cold war mentality, uphold equality and mutual respect and embrace openness and inclusiveness for mutual benefit and win-win results.
走出这一步就会海阔天空，但是如果继续固步自封、讳疾忌医，最终只会贻害无穷。
Breaking this mindset leads to a broad prospect, while clinging to it without taking any remedial measures will result in endless harm.
问：昨天有外国记者问到中国驻丹麦大使“威胁”法罗群岛使用华为5G设备的问题，丹麦政府是否就此向中方进行澄清？
Yesterday a foreign journalist asked here about the Chinese ambassador to Denmark "threatening" Faroe Islands on Huawei 5G equipment. Has the Danish government clarified this with China?
答：的确，丹麦方面已经向中方明确表示，近日有关媒体报道内容并不属实。
Yes, the Danish side has told China explicitly that recent reports are not fully truthful.
我们注意到，丹麦外交大臣昨天向丹麦媒体明确表示：“有关丹麦外交部告诉法罗政府最好不选择华为作为5G供应商的报道是错误的。
We note that the Danish foreign minister told Danish media yesterday that press indication that the Danish Foreign Ministry has told the Faroe Islands Government that it would be best not to choose Huawei as a supplier of 5G networks is not correct.
通信行业属法罗自主决策的领域，如何选择5G供应商是法罗自己的事。
The telecommunications area is a home-grown area. Therefore, the choice of 5G supplier lies with the Faroe Islands themselves.
相互尊重和遵守国际规则是丹麦外交政策的基础，适用于丹麦与其他国家交往，包括与中国良好的伙伴关系。”
Mutual respect and international rules is the basis for Danish foreign policy. That is how Denmark works with other countries and how it works with China, with which it has a good partnership.
法罗自治政府总理和外交部长也向媒体表示，从未在与中方交流中感受到威胁或胁迫，与中国大使会面是在相互尊重的基础上进行的良好、具有建设性的对话。
Faroe Islands Government Prime Minister and Foreign Minister also said to the press that they have not felt threatened or pressured in exchanges with China. Conversations with the Chinese ambassador are good and constructive on the basis of mutual respect.
法罗一些政党负责人和民众都认为美国大使日前公开阻止法罗同华为开展5G合作极为不合适，法罗虽小，但不会受制于美国压力，影响自己独立决策。
Many party leaders and the public in Faroe Islands see the US ambassador's open efforts against cooperation between Faroe Islands and Huawei as deeply inappropriate. Faroe islands is small, but it won't succumb to US pressure and let it swing its independent decision-making.
大家恐怕都还记得，就在不久前，美国驻丹麦大使、美国驻德国大使就中国同有关国家合作公然发表威胁言论，引起丹麦、德国两国政府和民众的强烈不满。
Perhaps you still remember that lately, US ambassadors to Denmark and Germany made open threats on relevant countries' cooperation with China, drawing strong protest in the two countries.
中方不会这么做。
China will never do that.
我们愿同丹方共同努力，不断深化政治互信，加强务实合作，本着平等和相互尊重的精神，推动两国互利合作不断取得更多成果。
We stand ready to work with Denmark to deepen political mutual trust, strengthen practical cooperation, and in the spirit of equality and mutual respect, promote our mutually-beneficial cooperation.
问：12日，美国驻澳大利亚大使卡尔瓦豪斯接受采访时称，在澳维吾尔族人受到外国特工监控和骚扰，他们家门口停着有“中国警方”标志的假警车，发表任何关于维族人所处境遇的担忧都会受到惩罚。
American ambassador to Australia Arthur Culvahouse said in an interview on December 13 that Uighur community in Australia is being monitored and harassed by foreign agents. There's fake police cars with Chinese police logos parked outside their residences. Anyone voicing concerns about Uighurs' treatment will be punished.
中国政府须为此负责，并承担后果。
The Chinese government is responsible for this and there should be consequences.
答：（笑）我不知道你看到这个报道怎么想，反正我只想笑。
I wonder what you make of this report? It's so laughable for me anyway.
是中国警察太傻？还是澳大利亚警察太无能？还是这位美国驻澳大利亚大使太愚蠢？中国警察漂洋过海，把带有“中国警方”标志的假警车放在澳大利亚维吾尔族人家门口来进行“威慑”，我觉得好莱坞再差的编剧也编不出这么烂的剧本来。
Is the Chinese police too silly, the Australian police too incompetent or this US ambassador too stupid? He claims Chinese police travel all the way across the sea to threaten Uighurs with fake police cars parked outside their residences.
拜托，要想黑中国，即便是走火入魔了，也要用点脑子，要不然只会沦为一个笑话。
Come on, even the worst screenwriter in Hollywood can do better than this. A word of advice: Even if driven out of mind by attempts to defame China, please use the brain a little bit. Otherwise such tales will only end up as another laughing stock.
2019年12月11日外交部发言人华春莹主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Hua Chunying's Regular Press Conference on December 11, 2019
应莱索托王国政府、肯尼亚共和国政府、塞舌尔共和国政府邀请，国务委员王勇将于12月12日至21日对上述三国进行正式友好访问。
At the invitation of the government of the Kingdom of Lesotho, the government of the Republic of Kenya and the government of the Republic of Seychelles, State Councilor Wang Yong will pay official friendly visits to these three countries from December 12 to 21.
访问肯尼亚期间，王勇将作为习近平主席特使出席内罗毕—马拉巴标准轨铁路一期货运通车仪式。
During his visit to Kenya, State Councilor Wang Yong, as the Special Envoy of President Xi Jinping, will attend the launch ceremony for the freight service of the Nairobi-Malaba Standard Gauge Railway project (phase one).
问：据报道，美国国务卿蓬佩奥同拉夫罗夫举行会谈并共见记者时称，当今时代威胁战略稳定的不仅是导弹、潜艇，也包括其他武器，军控对话应予以扩大，纳入中国。
At a joint press conference with his Russian counterpart Lavrov, US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said that today's threat to strategic stability go far beyond missiles and submarines. China has to be brought in to a wider arms control discussion.
虽然中国核力量确实同美俄差距巨大，但军控对话并非意在限制任何国家的核力量，而是旨在开展建设性对话，维护全球安全稳定。
Though China is estimated to have far fewer nuclear weapons than the United States and Russia, the arms control talks are not intended to restrict the nuclear power of any country, but to have constructive dialogue and uphold global security and stability.
中国对此有何评论？
What's your comment?
答：中方已经多次重申，我们无意参加所谓的“中美俄三边军控谈判”，这一立场十分明确，也得到了包括俄罗斯在内的国际社会广泛理解。
China has repeatedly reiterated that it has no intention of participating in the so-called trilateral arms control negotiations with the US and Russia. This position is very clear and has been widely understood by the international community including Russia.
美方在核裁军问题上不断拿中国说事，借此逃避和转嫁核裁军责任，中方对此坚决反对。
The US constantly makes an issue of China on nuclear disarmament issue to shirk and shift the responsibility for nuclear disarmament. China is firmly opposed to that.
中方认为，作为世界上拥有最大和最先进核武库的国家，美国应该切实履行其核裁军特殊责任，回应俄罗斯有关延长《新削减进攻性战略武器条约》的呼吁，并进一步削减其庞大的核武库，为其他核武器国家加入多边核裁军谈判创造条件。
China believes that as a country that possesses the world's largest and most advanced nuclear arsenal, the United States should take the special responsibility for nuclear disarmament, respond to Russia's call to extend the New START Treaty, and further downsize its huge nuclear arsenal, so as to create conditions for other nuclear weapon states to join multilateral disarmament talks.
如果美国真正关心全球战略稳定，就应当停止当前毁约、退群的做法，停止破坏全球战略平衡与稳定的消极举措，停止渲染大国竞争和对抗，立即回到多边主义的正确轨道，切实维护基于国际法的国际秩序，维护现有军控与防扩散法律体系的权威性和有效性。
If the US really cares about the global strategic stability, it should stop withdrawing from international treaties and agreements, stop negative moves that undermine global strategic balance and stability, and stop playing up power competition and confrontation. It should immediately return to the right track of multilateralism, safeguard international order based on international law and uphold the authority and effectiveness of the legal system of international arms control and non-proliferation regime.
我还想强调的是，中方一贯致力于维护国际军控与防扩散体系，致力于推进国际军控和裁军进程，致力于维护全球战略平衡与稳定。
I want to stress that China is consistently committed to upholding the international arms control and non-proliferation regime, advancing international arms control and disarmament process and safeguarding global strategic balance and stability.
中方愿同各方一道继续在裁军谈判会议、五核国机制等框架内加强沟通与协作，就事关全球战略稳定的广泛议题进行讨论，为国际和平安全作出积极贡献。
China stands ready to work with all parties to strengthen communication and coordination within the framework of the Conference on Disarmament and the mechanism of five nuclear-weapon states, discuss a wide range of issues concerning global strategic stability and make positive contributions to international peace and security.
问：美国国务卿蓬佩奥昨天再次发表声明，指责中国“压迫”宗教与少数民族人士并“侵害”人民自由，并称若要在爱好自由国家眼中重获其道德权威性，必须重新致力于保护人权与基本自由。
US Secretary of State Pompeo said in a statement yesterday that China continues to repress members of religious and ethnic minority groups. In order to regain moral authority in the eyes of freedom-loving nations, China must rededicate itself to protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms.
你对此有何回应？
What's your comment?
答：美方的这个声明让我再次想起了安徒生童话《皇帝的新装》。
What the US says reminds me of the foolish emperor in Andersen's fairy tale "the Emperor's New Clothes".
这真是莫大的讽刺：明明自己没有穿衣服，还自我感觉好到爆棚。
It cannot be more ironic that a naked man is so proud of his imaginary clothes.
今天的美国还真没有什么资格来跟中国谈人权和道德。
The US today is in no position to talk about human rights or morality with China.
昨天，我已经详细列举了中国70年来人权事业取得的伟大成就。
Yesterday I detailed the great achievements in China's human rights progress over the past seven decades since the founding of the PRC.
在中国960万平方公里的土地上没有战乱恐惧和颠沛流离，56个民族和谐相处，8.5亿人摆脱了贫困，14亿人民安居乐业。
Its vast land of 9.6 million square kilometers is free from war, terror and displacement. People of all 56 ethnic groups live in harmony. 850 million people have got out of poverty and 1.4 billion people lead happy and fulfilling lives.
连续10多年，中国对全球GDP增量贡献率高达30%以上。
For over ten consecutive years, China has contributed to over 30% of global GDP growth.
中国不仅创造了人类发展史上的奇迹，也为世界人权事业发展作出了巨大贡献，得到了世界各国的一致赞许。
It has created a development miracle in human history and made huge contribution to world human rights cause, winning worldwide acclaim.
反观美国，不仅国内种族歧视等人权问题泛滥严重，还伸长了手到处干预别国内政，大搞“颜色革命”和政权更迭，不断在伊拉克、叙利亚、阿富汗等国挑起战火、滥杀无辜，假借自由和人权的名义在世界范围内干了多少坏事?!
In stark contrast, the US faces rampant and serious racial discrimination at home. Besides, it has a hand in other countries' internal affairs wherever it can, instigates "color revolutions" and regime change, stages wars and kills innocent lives in Iraq, Syria and Afghanistan. How many bad things has it done under the pretext of freedom and human rights all round the world?
不仅如此，还动用国家力量、滥用所谓的国家安全名义打压特定企业，动辄挥舞着制裁大棒，肆意奉行单边主义、保护主义，屡屡退群毁约，破坏损害国际多边机制，毫无信誉可言。
Apart from that, It abuses state power and the concept of national security to oppress certain enterprises, wantonly wields the big stick of sanction, willfully practices unilateralism, pulls out of international treaties and organizations and undermines international multilateral mechanisms without a shred of credibility left.
面对世人的侧目，不仅不以为耻，反以为荣；明明已经从山巅之城跌落，还浑然不觉，颐指气使。
However, the US is so proud rather than ashamed when such behaviors raise eyebrows across the world. It is no longer a city upon the hill but still acts so arrogantly without even knowing that.
对此，我们注意到美国国内正在出现越来越多理智的反思和声音。
In the meantime, we noticed more and more rational reflection and voice at home in the US.
自知之明是一种智慧，也是一种做人的境界，希望美方能够认识到这一点。
Knowing oneself is a wisdom and merit. We hope the US will get to know this point.
问：近日，《华盛顿邮报》发表题为《关于战争的真相》报道，指出阿富汗战争18年来，美国高官不断撒谎误导公众。
A recent Washington Post article "At War with the Truth" reveals that senior U.S. officials failed to tell the truth about the war in Afghanistan throughout the 18-year campaign, making rosy pronouncements they knew to be false to mislead the public.
报道称，美政府“可悲地”对敌人是谁一无所知。
The report said that the US government pathetically knows nothing about who is the enemy.
这场共造成2400名美军丧生、花费近1万亿美元的美国史上最长战争实际造成了成千上万的人被“不必要地”杀害。
This most prolonged war in US history which costs $1 trillion and 2,400 lives of US service men and women in fact led to thousands needlessly killed.
此外，根据联合国统计数据，2018年，有3804名阿富汗平民在战争中丧生。
According to UN statistics, 3,804 Afghan civilians were killed in 2018.
今年头10个月，美军空袭已造成579名平民丧生。
In the first 10 months this year, US-backed airstrikes have killed 579 civilians.
发言人对此有何评论？
What's your comment?
答：你提到的这篇报道其实是对美方长期以来自诩人权和道德卫士的一记响亮耳光，而且恐怕也只是美方此类问题的冰山一角。
For the US, a self-claimed "defender of human rights and morality", this report is such a loud slap in the face. And I'm afraid this is only the tip of the iceberg for what the US has done.
大家都还记得，当年美国以所谓伊拉克藏匿大规模杀伤性武器为由，对伊拉克发动了军事打击，造成了数十万百姓伤亡，100多万人无家可归。
As you may recall, under the pretext of Iraq hiding weapons of mass destruction (WMDs), the US launched attacks in Iraq that caused hundreds of thousands of innocent casualties and over a million displaced people.
多年后美方才承认情报有误，所谓的伊拉克藏匿杀伤性武器的证据不过是一小袋白色洗衣粉。
It was years later that the US admitted errors in its intelligence and that the so-called evidence for WMDs was merely a small bag of washing powder.
美国以叙利亚政府对人民使用化学武器为由对叙利亚屡屡发动空袭，导致成千上万无辜生命伤亡和流离失所。
Claiming that the Syrian government used chemical weapons against its people, the US launched air strikes in Syria, leaving tens of thousands injured, killed and displaced.
但美方所谓叙利亚政府使用化武的证据后来被证明不过是“白头盔”组织自编自导自演的摆拍视频而已。
However, later it was found out that the "evidence" that the US presented to prove the Syrian government used chemical weapons to kill its citizens was nothing more than a video that was self-choreographed, self-directed and self-acted by the White Helmets.
可悲的是，美方显然没有从中汲取什么教训，仍然以“莫须有”的罪名到处发动攻击，悲剧仍然在延续。
Sadly, the US apparently didn't learn the lessons at all. It is still striking everywhere under trumped-up pretexts. Tragedies are still ongoing.
这样的一个美国已经成为当今世界和平安全与稳定的最大威胁。
This country has become the most dangerous threat against world peace, security and stability.
当前世界正处于关键的十字路口，国际正义不能失去。
Our world is at a critical crossroads, and we cannot afford losing international justice.
我们希望美方深刻反思，把规则和秩序还给世界，把和平与安宁还给世界。
We hope the US will sincerely reflect on its deeds and restore rules, order, peace and tranquility for the world.
问：根据联合国制裁决议，所有在国外工作的朝鲜工人必须于今年12月22日前回国。
According to UN sanctions, all DPRK workers abroad must return home by December 22.
你能否介绍目前有多少朝鲜人在中国工作？12月22日后，他们会被遣送回朝鲜吗？
Could you tell us how many DPRK citizens are currently working in China? What will happen to them after the December 22 deadline? Will they be deported to the DPRK?
答：我不掌握你问的具体数字。
I'm not aware of the number you asked about.
但我可以非常负责任地告诉你，作为国际社会负责任的一员，中国一向认真执行联合国各项决议。
But I can tell you responsibly that as a responsible member of the international community, China earnestly implements UN resolutions.
问：王勇国务委员2017年曾作为习近平主席特使出席蒙内铁路通车仪式，此次再次作为习近平主席特使出席内马铁路一期通车仪式，请问中方何以如此重视？
In 2017, State Councilor Wang Yong attended the launch ceremony for the Mombasa-Nairobi Railway as the Special Envoy of President Xi Jinping. This time and in the same capacity, he will witness the inauguration of the Nairobi-Malaba Standard Gauge Railway project (phase one).
如何看待中国同肯尼亚的铁路合作，中方对未来两国铁路合作有何期待？
Why does China believe that it is important to do this? How does China view its railway cooperation with Kenya?
答：蒙内铁路建成以来运营安全、顺利，为促进肯尼亚经济社会发展、加快实现工业化和提升地区互联互通水平发挥了积极作用。
What is China's expectation for bilateral cooperation in this area? Since its completion, the Mombasa-Nairobi Railway has seen a safe and smooth operation and played a positive role in driving Kenya's economic and social development, speeding up its industrialization and promoting regional connectivity.
此次建成通车的内马一期是蒙内铁路向肯尼亚内陆地区的延长线，是中肯、中非产能合作和共建“一带一路”的又一重要成果。
Phase one of the Nairobi-Malaba Railway is an extension of the Mombasa-Nairobi Railway as it stretches into the inland areas of Kenya. It is another important outcome of China-Kenya and China-Africa cooperation on industrial capacity and the Belt and Road Initiative.
和蒙内铁路一样，中肯双方在建设内马铁路的过程中，充分秉持共商共建共享的精神，坚持了合作发展互利共赢的原则，深入贯彻绿色生态环保的发展理念，对中非基础设施建设合作具有重要示范意义。
During the construction of the Nairobi-Malaba Railway, as with the Mombasa-Nairobi Railway, China and Kenya have been cooperating under the principle of extensive consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits for common development and win-win-results and living up to the green and environment-conscious development concept, which stands as a shining example for China-Africa infrastructure building cooperation.
内马一期的建成，将进一步降低肯尼亚和东非地区物流运输成本。
The completion of Phase one of the Nairobi-Malaba Railway will further reduce the logistics and transportation costs for Kenya and East Africa.
中方将同肯方共同努力，安全、高效运营蒙内、内马铁路，最大程度释放铁路的经济社会效益。
China and Kenya will work together to ensure the safe and efficient operation of the Mombasa-Nairobi Railway and the Nairobi-Malaba Railway and fully tap into the economic and social potential brought along by the railway projects.
问：据丹麦媒体报道，中国驻丹麦大使曾表示，如果法罗群岛不与华为签署5G协议，中方将取消与其签署自贸协议。
According to reports from Danish media, China's ambassador to Denmark said that Beijing would drop a free trade agreement with Faroe Islands if they don't secure a contract with Huawei.
你能否证实？中国政府是否也对其它国家施压迫使其使用华为？
Are these reports true? And is China using trade agreements to pressure other countries to use Huawei?
答：你提的这个问题中有事实性错误。
There is a factual error in your question.
中国和法罗群岛地区并没有在谈自贸协定，何来取消一说？
China and the Faroe Islands are not in talks for a free trade agreement. How could it be canceled?
又何来中国大使威胁要取消一说？但如果你关注美国高官满世界抹黑攻击中国企业、威胁有关国家不要与中国特定企业开展合作，你就能理解什么才是真正的威胁。
Why would the Chinese ambassador threaten to cancel it? If you see how senior U.S. officials smear and attack Chinese companies wherever they go and threaten others to stop doing business with these companies, you will get an idea of what the real threat is.
中国和丹麦法罗群岛地区有着良好合作关系，中国驻丹麦大使同法罗群岛官员会面是正常履职，谈的是友好与合作，维护的是中国企业的正当合法权益。
China and the Faroe Islands of Denmark enjoy good cooperative relations. When the Chinese ambassador to Denmark met with officials from the Faroe Islands, he was performing his duties, talking about friendship and cooperation and safeguarding the legitimate rights and interests of Chinese enterprises.
你提到的有关媒体报道内容有误，而且完全是别有用心的。
The media reports you mentioned are wrong and ill-intentioned.
问：据报道，由于美国阻挠新法官遴选和任命，两名法官的任期于10日结束后，WTO上诉机构于11日被迫“停摆”。
According to reports, after two judges' term ended on December 10, the WTO Appellate Body will stop functioning today because the US obstructs the selection and appointment of new judges.
答：很遗憾，WTO上诉机构成了美国单边主义和保护主义的又一个受害者。
Unfortunately the WTO Appellate Body has become another victim of US unilateralism and protectionism.
作为卓有成效的WTO贸易争端解决机制的重要组成部分，上诉机构将暂时停止运转。
The Appellate Body, an important component of effective WTO dispute settlement mechanism, will temporarily go lights out.
这是WTO成立以来多边贸易体制遭到的最沉重的打击。
This is no doubt the most severe blow to the multilateral trading system since its establishment.
对于世界贸易秩序来说，上诉机构的瘫痪可能带来不可弥补的损害和难以预料的后果。
For the world trade order, the paralysis of the Appellate Body may bring irreparable damages and unintended consequences.
我不知道大家有没有注意到媒体报道，中国常驻世界贸易组织代表张向晨大使日前在出席世贸组织2019年度第五次总理事会时特意戴上了一条黑色的领带。
I don't know if you noticed that Chinese Ambassador to the WTO Zhang Xiangchen chose to wear a black tie to the 5th General Council Meeting of the WTO.
但是他同时表示，他不想表现出丝毫的沮丧，因为挫折可以使我们清醒，帮助我们反思，督促我们前进。
Nevertheless, he said he did not want to show even the slightest frustration, since the setback could help us to stay cool, stay reflective, and push us forward.
WTO成立25年来，争端解决机制发挥了重要的作用。
Over the past 25 years since the establishment of the WTO, the dispute settlement system has played an outstanding role.
专家组和上诉机构就200多个争端做出裁决，大多数都得到了顺利的解决。
Panels and Appellate Body have rendered decisions in almost 200 disputes and most have been settled smoothly and effectively.
但现在美方一意孤行，蛮横阻挠，致使上诉机构陷入瘫痪，这反映出了多边贸易体制的脆弱性。
But the US persists to go its own way and obstruct the process, finally paralyzing the whole Appellate Body. This reveals the fragility of the multilateral trading system.
上诉机构的价值，对于尊崇多边主义的人来说，价值连城；但是对于个别迷信丛林法则的人来说，或许一钱不值。
What is the Appellate Body worth? For those who uphold multilateralism, it is invaluable. For those who prefer laws of the jungle, perhaps it is worthless.
但是国际社会不能失去公平和正义，不能任由个别国家、个别人为所欲为，相信这是国际社会绝大多数成员的共同心声。
But the international community cannot afford to lose justice. Nobody and no country should be allowed to do whatever they want. This is the shared view of the vast majority of the international community.
我们注意到有117个成员呼吁立即启动遴选，表明了绝大多数成员对恢复上诉机构的强烈政治意愿。
We note that 117 Members have called for the immediate launch of selection process which is a strong testimony of the majority membership's political will to restore the Appellate Body.
中方愿意同志同道合的绝大多数一道，继续推动解决上诉机构面临的挑战。
China will continue to work with like-minded members to address the challenge facing the Appellate Body.
问：关于记者的问题。
A question on journalists.
今天，美国保护记者委员会发布报告称，至少有48名记者目前在中国被拘留，这一数字是所有国家中最大的。
A report has been published today by the US-based Committee to Protect Journalists. The report says that at least 48 journalists are currently jailed, detained in China. It says it's the largest number of any country in the world.
你能否证实？
Does China confirm this number of 48 journalists jailed?
答：首先，你提到的这个组织是美国的，对吧？在经历了这么多事情以后，美国操纵的这些组织已经没有任何信誉可言了，你同不同意？
First, you said it's a US-based organization, right? After all that has happened, there is no credibility left to US-manipulated organizations. Do you agree?
第二，你说有48名记者被拘押，不知你说的是外国记者呢，还是中国记者？近600名外国记者在中国常驻，他们在这里生活工作得很愉快。
Second, you said 48 journalists were detained. I wonder if you were talking about Chinese or foreign journalists? Nearly 600 foreign journalists are leading a happy life here in China.
事实上，你们应该为在北京而不是在华盛顿工作感到幸运。因为我注意到最近有报道说，在美国因为记者漏报了什么或错报了什么，就被立即解职了。
In fact, I think it's fortunate that you work in Beijing instead of Washington D.C. I noted some media saying that journalists there were fired just because they didn't report or misreported certain things.
所以你们在这应该感到幸运。
Fortunately you are working in China.
第三，最近在香港系列风波中，媒体报道显示，有很多假记者在做着违法的事情。
During the recent disturbances in Hong Kong, media reports showed that some fake journalists did illegal things.
对于那些假记者玷污新闻媒体从业人员声誉的行为，我好像也没有看到相关组织有报道，或作出应有的谴责。
But I don't recall seeing relevant organizations condemning their behaviors that tainted the reputation of the press community.
最后，你提到美国这个组织报告中的具体情况我不了解，没有办法向你核实。
I'm not aware of the details of the US-based committee you talked about, and I cannot verify the number for you.
但中国是法治国家，任何人都不能凌驾于法律之上。
But since China is a country based on rule of law, no one is above the law.
如果触犯了法律，不管是什么身份，是记者也好，是公务员也好，都会受到法律的追究。
No matter you are a journalist or a public servant, if you violate the law, you will be punished.
因此我认为在提这个问题之前，首先应该了解清楚这40多人是否做了什么违法事情。
Before asking this question, I think you need to first know if those people breached the law.
问：据报道，美国国会众院的文件最新数据显示，美国政府2018年捐赠232万美元，是世界反兴奋剂机构最大的赞助人。
According to the latest statistics from the US House of Representatives, the US government contributed $2.32 million to the World Anti-doping Agency (WADA), making it the largest patron of the organization.
另有报道称，国际反兴奋剂组织一直对美国运动员网开一面。
There are also reports saying that WADA has always been cutting American athletes some slack.
2015年，美国以“因病服药”的名义申请豁免的运动员高达653人，通过申请的有402人，而同年俄罗斯只有20人通过。
In 2015, 402 American athletes were granted Therapeutic Use Exemption (TUE) among 653 who applied for it, while only 20 Russian athletes were granted TUE in the same year.
联想到近期中国运动员的遭遇，你对此有何评论？
This revelation brings us to what's happened to Chinese athletes recently. What is your comment?
答：我今天早上也看到了你提到的报道，具体情况我不了解。
I am not aware of the specifics.
但是如果报道属实，那这背后隐藏的丑陋与肮脏的确令人感到厌恶和警觉。
If these reports are true, then the ugly and foul dealings revealed by these reports are really repulsing and alarming.
我昨天已经说了，中国在反兴奋剂问题上的立场是非常明确的，我们一直对使用兴奋剂采取“零容忍”态度，同时我们坚决反对将体育赛事“政治化”。
China's stance on anti-doping is very clear. We have been adopting a zero-tolerance attitude towards the use of stimulants and we oppose politicizing sports events.
我们认为各国干净运动员的合法权益必须得到保护，国际体育运动的公正、公平和纯洁必须得到维护。
The legitimate rights of all clean athletes must be protected and the fairness, justice and purity of the international sports events should be safeguarded.
问：关于香港警察的问题。
One more question on the Hong Kong police.
负责调查香港警察过度使用暴力指控的国际专家称，由于受权不足，他们将退出调查。
International experts overseeing an investigation into allegation of excessive force used by Hong Kong police have said they are stepping down over the lack of powers.
你对此有何评论？
Do you have any comment to make on this decision?
答：你的问题其实不是外交部发言人应该回答的问题。
This question is not for the MFA spokesperson to answer.
回顾一下过去几个月所发生的事实，说香港警察过度使用暴力，这是天大的谎言！你听说过有任何一个示威者，因为香港警方过度使用暴力而致死吗？
If we look back on what happened during the past months, we can see it is the greatest lie to claim that Hong Kong police resorted to excessive use of force. Is there a single demonstrator killed by the police's excessive use of violence?
我们看到的是，无辜的路人、市民，因为暴徒张狂使用暴力而面临生命危险。
What we have seen is innocent civilians' lives threatened by rioters' rampant use of violence.
我们看到的是，几百个高素质的香港武装警察因为暴徒的暴行而受到了不同程度的伤害，有的被割颈，有的被燃烧弹烧伤，有的被弹弓弹珠打伤等等。
What we have seen is several hundred members of a great police force sustaining different degrees of injuries from rioter violence including throat-slashing, petro bombs, sling shots, etc.
只要你能够注意到这些事实，这个问题你恐怕问都不会问。
If you have been paying attention to these facts, you wouldn't even have asked the question.
环顾世界，在美国、法国，有任何警察能像香港警方这样高度克制吗？
Is there another police force in the world, the US and France included, equally restrained as the Hong Kong police force?
记者：我用的是“指控”一词，而非“事实”。
Journalist: The word I used is "allegation", not "fact".
好吧，那你报道的时候一定要驳斥这种无端指责。
Okay, but you need to refute such a groundless allegation in your report, because this is clearly wrong.
这是明显的错误说法，谁这么说，就是昧着良心睁眼说瞎话。
Anyone alleging so is telling lies against their conscience.
作为负责任的媒体，这个时候应该为香港警察的克制和专业加油鼓劲。
Responsible media agencies should applaud the restraint and professionalism of the Hong Kong police.
他们是守护香港法治的最后一道防线。
They are the defender of Hong Kong's rule of law.
他们的专业精神、他们的牺牲、他们的奉献应该令所有人感到敬佩。
Their professional spirit, sacrifice and contributions should be saluted by all.
问：在我看来，这一国际专家组是香港特区政府任命的，但是特区政府却又不听取他们的建议，所以他们退出了调查。
A follow-up on that. I think in relation to that question was that an international panel appointed by the Hong Kong government reportedly resigned because the Hong Kong government which appointed the experts would now not listen to their advice.
你对此有何评论？
Do you have any comment on that?
答：我说过了，这些问题不该来问我。
I already said this is not a question for me to answer.
但我觉得对一个正直和有良心的人来说，这个答案是显而易见的。
But I believe the answer is only too obvious to anyone who is upright and has a conscience.
你对香港问题的报道，我认为是不公正的、不公平的。
I don't think your reports on Hong Kong were fair or just.
设想如果是你们在那个场合，受到了伤害，如果你的家属是香港警察，你会怎么想？媒体人首先是要做一个正直的人，要秉持职业操守。
Suppose you were injured there, suppose one of your family members works in the Hong Kong police force, what would you think? A journalist must be first and foremost an upright person upholding press ethics.
问：丹麦媒体的报道称，一个录音记录显示了中国大使曾与法罗群岛政府官员谈话。
The reports coming out of Denmark are saying that there is a recording of these conversations with the Chinese ambassador and members of the Faroe Islands government.
这些谈话是否真的发生过？在谈话中，中国大使是否向对方提出要求其使用华为5G？
Did the conversations take place? And in those conversations did the Chinese ambassador recommend using Huawei 5G?
答：我刚才已经回答了这个问题。
I took a similar question earlier.
你听说法罗群岛当地官员对此作出说明或指责了吗？
Did you hear officials of the Faroe Islands making statements or accusations?
正如我刚才所说，如果你去关注一下美国高官在全世界范围内对中国公司的威胁、抹黑和攻击，你就会理解什么才是真正的威胁。
As I said, if you look at the threats, smears and attacks made by American senior officials against Chinese companies worldwide, you will understand what real threats are.
对于中国大使来说，他履行的是正常职责。
The Chinese ambassador was only fulfilling his duty.
中国与法罗群岛地区有着良好的合作关系，大使是去商谈友好与合作。
As China and the Faroe Islands enjoy good cooperation, the ambassador was only talking about friendship and cooperation.
记者追问：中国大使是否在谈话中提及要求对方使用华为5G以及中国与法罗群岛可能在未来签署自贸协定？
Follow-up: So it may just have been a misunderstanding. It is possible he referred to the use of Huawei 5G as an option in the same conversation which maybe involved talks about a future free trade agreement.
或许这只是误解？ 谈还是没有谈到华为，你认为有任何区别或实质意义吗？美国官员、大使可以满世界抹黑攻击中国华为，难道中国大使同其驻在国官员谈合作的时候，就不能提到中国公司的名字吗？这是什么逻辑？
It could be a misunderstanding, that these things were discussed, but maybe not the way it is interpreted. Whether they talked about Huawei or not, does it make a difference? While American officials and ambassadors are free to slander Huawei wherever they go, why is it that a Chinese ambassador cannot even mention the name of a Chinese company during discussions on cooperation with host country officials? Does it make any sense?
你是不是觉得中国还处于这样一个时代？美国可以满世界抹黑、攻击、打压中国，而我们连名字都不可以提，更不能还嘴，你认为是这样吗？我告诉你，这样的时代一去不复返了。
Do you think China is still in an era where the US can do all it can to smear, attack and oppress us while we cannot even mention a name, much less talk back? Well, that era is long gone.
我们有责任坚决维护中国公民和企业的正当合法权利。
It is our responsibility to defend the legitimate rights of Chinese nationals and companies.
问：在12月15日新一轮美对华加征关税生效之前，中美双方是否就签署经贸协议做了准备或沟通？是否有两国领导人通话的计划？
We were wondering if there is any preparations or communication that China and the US have made to seal the deal before the next round of tariffs takes effect on December 15, and what, if any plans, are there for a call between the leaders of the two countries?
答：这个问题你要去问商务部门。
You may need to ask the Commerce Ministry.
问：有报道援引伊朗方面消息人士称，伊朗计划与中国和俄罗斯在印度洋某地共同举行海军演习。
Reports quoting Iranian sources say that Iran will hold joint naval exercises with Russian and Chinese forces somewhere in the Indian Ocean.
你能否证实？
Is this true?
答：我不了解，请向国防部询问。
I'm not aware of that. I'd refer you to the National Defense Ministry.
2019年12月10日外交部发言人华春莹主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Hua Chunying's Regular Press Conference on December 10, 2019
国务院总理李克强将于12月24日在四川成都主持召开第八次中日韩领导人会议，韩国总统文在寅、日本首相安倍晋三将出席会议。
Premier Li Keqiang will chair the 8th China-Japan-ROK leaders' meeting in Chengdu, Sichuan on December 24. ROK President Moon Jae-in and Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe will attend the meeting.
今年适逢中日韩合作20周年，三国合作取得丰硕成果。
This year marks the 20th anniversary of China-Japan-ROK cooperation, which witnesses fruitful outcomes.
此次会议将着眼未来十年，推动三国提升合作水平，促进地区和世界的和平稳定与发展繁荣。
This meeting is aimed to improve bilateral cooperation for the decade to come and promote regional and world peace, stability, development and prosperity.
问：第八次中日韩领导人会议期间，中韩、中日领导人是否有双边会晤安排？
Will China hold bilateral meetings with ROK and Japanese leaders during the 8th China-Japan-ROK leaders' meeting?
答：中方作为此次中日韩领导人会议东道主，将作出周到妥善安排。
As the host for this China-Japan-ROK leaders' meeting, China will make proper arrangements.
我们正同韩、日双方保持密切沟通。
We are in close communication with both the ROK and Japan.
问：今天是“世界人权日”。
It's the Human Rights Day today.
有个国家发布声明，对中国人权状况提出关切和批评。
A certain country raises concerns over and criticizes human rights in China.
中方对此有何评论？
How do you respond?
答：个别国家罔顾基本事实，对中国人权状况说三道四、妄加指责，中方对此坚决反对。
The relevant country has made irresponsible accusations about China's human rights situation in disregard of basic facts. China is firmly opposed to that.
我们多次说过，中国人权状况怎么样，中国人民最有发言权。
The Chinese people have the best say in the human rights situation in China.
今年是中华人民共和国成立70周年。
This year marks the 70th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China.
这是中国发生历史性变化的70年，也是中国人权事业取得历史性进步的70年。
The past 70 years witnessed a sea change in China and historic progress in its human rights cause.
70年前，在中国共产党的领导下，中国人民实现了翻身解放和当家作主。
Seventy years ago, under the leadership of the Communist Party of China, the Chinese people realized liberation and became their own masters.
70年来，中华民族迎来了从站起来、富起来到强起来。
Over the past 70 years, the Chinese nation has found its feet and become prosperous and strong.
中国政府高度重视发展人权事业，奉行以人民为中心的人权理念，坚持人权的普遍性原则与自身实际相结合，把生存权、发展权作为首要的基本人权，走出了一条符合国情的中国特色人权发展道路。
The Chinese government and people attach great importance to human rights cause, espouse a people-centered view of human rights, integrate the principle of universality of human rights with national conditions, and regard the rights to subsistence and development as its primary and basic human rights, opening a new path of human rights protection with Chinese characteristics based on its national conditions.
我们解决了近14亿人的温饱，减少了8.5亿贫困人口,为7.7亿人提供就业，为2.5亿老年人、8500万残疾人和6000多万城乡低保人口提供基本保障，实现了近14亿人从贫困到温饱再到小康的历史性跨越，建成世界上最大规模的教育体系、最大规模的社保体系、最大规模的医疗体系、最大规模的基层民主选举体系，谱写了中国人权进步的历史篇章，拓宽了国际人权保障的现实方案，丰富了人类文明的多样性。
We ensure enough food and clothing for nearly 1.4 billion people, cut impoverished population by 850 million, provide employment for 770 million people, and offer basic security to 250 million elderly, 85 million persons with disabilities and more than 60 million persons that receive urban or rural minimum living subsidies. We have made a historic leap from poverty to adequate food and clothing, and to a moderately prosperous society for around 1.4 billion people. Besides, we have developed the largest national education system, largest social security system, largest medical system and largest community-level democracy system in the world, which composes an epic of China's human rights progress, offers solutions for international human rights protection and enriches the diversity of human civilization.
这是任何不带偏见的人都不得不承认的事实。
This is an undeniable truth for all impartial persons.
今天是“世界人权日”，是各方重申人权承诺、加强人权交流的日子。
The Human Rights Day is an occasion for all parties to reaffirm their commitment to human rights and strengthen human rights exchanges.
为此，中国国务院新闻办公室和外交部于12月10日至11日共同在京主办“2019·南南人权论坛”，为来自不同国家、不同文化背景的各界人士提供沟通交流、共谋合作的平台，为人权领域交流与合作注入新的内涵和动力。
To this end, the Information Office of the State Council and the Foreign Ministry will jointly host the "2019 South-South Human Rights Forum" in Beijing from December 10 to 11, providing a platform for communication, exchange and cooperation for people from different countries and cultural backgrounds, with a view to adding new dimensions and injecting impetus into exchange and cooperation in the field of human rights.
我们认为各方应该进一步促进和保护人权，恪守《联合国宪章》宗旨和原则，尊重各国自主选择的人权发展道路，秉持客观、公正、非选择性立场，避免将人权问题政治化和搞双重标准。
It is an opportunity for all parties to further promote and protect human rights, abide by the purposes and principles of the UN charter, respect the paths of human rights development chosen by all countries on their own, take an objective, just and non-selective stance, and avoid politicizing human rights issues and applying double standards.
中方愿继续在平等和互相尊重的基础上，与各方开展和加强在人权领域的交流与合作，以合作促发展，以发展促人权，共同构建人类命运共同体。
China stands ready to step up exchange and cooperation with all parties in the field of human rights on the basis of equality and mutual respect, advance development through cooperation while promoting human rights through development, and jointly build a community with a shared future for mankind.
问：今天是两名加拿大公民康明凯和迈克尔因国家安全原因被中方拘押一周年的日子。
It has been one year today since two Canadians Michael Kovrig and Michael Spavor have been detained in China for national security reasons.
据称，他们无法见到家人和律师。
They have reportedly no access to families or lawyers.
中国是法治国家。
China is country ruled by law.
你可否解释为何他们不能见律师？
Can you explain why they cannot have access to lawyers?
答：我们之前已应询多次介绍了这两名加拿大公民的情况。
We have repeatedly provided information on the two Canadian citizens upon request.
加拿大人康明凯为境外刺探国家秘密、情报案和迈克尔为境外窃取、非法提供国家秘密案，已经由侦查机关侦查终结，并按法律规定移送检察机关审查起诉。
Michael Kovrig's case involves covertly gathering state secrets and intelligence for foreign forces, and Michael Spavor's involves stealing and illegally providing state secrets to foreign forces. The investigative process on the two cases has been completed and they have been transferred to procuratorial authorities for investigation and prosecution.
中国司法部门严格依法办案，保障康明凯和迈克尔的合法权利。
China's judicial authorities handle cases in strict accordance with law and protect the two Canadian citizens' lawful rights.
据我了解，办案机关已安排加拿大驻华使馆对他们进行了多次领事探视。
I understand the authorities have arranged multiple consular visits by the Canadian embassy in China.
他们的状况是良好的。
The two are in sound condition.
中国司法部门严格执法、文明办案，他们两人的合法权利得到了保障。
China's judicial organs carry out their duties in strict accordance with law and protect the two Canadians' lawful rights.
问：此次中日韩领导人会议期间，除了三国领导人会谈，中韩领导人是否将举行会谈？习近平主席或李克强总理是否将与文在寅总统举行会见和会谈？中方对有关的会谈有何期待？
Will China and the ROK hold bilateral meetings on the sidelines of the 8th China-Japan-ROK leaders' meeting? Will President Xi Jinping or Premier Li Keqiang meet and hold talks with President Moon Jae-in?

What does China expect from the talks?
答：我刚才已经介绍了，中方作为此次中日韩领导人会议东道主，将作出周到妥善安排。
Like I just said, as the host for this China-Japan-ROK leaders' meeting, China will make proper arrangements.
我们也正就此同韩方保持着密切沟通。
We are in close communication with the ROK.
中韩互为重要近邻和合作伙伴，当前中韩关系保持良好发展势头。
China and the ROK are important close neighbors and cooperative partners enjoying a sound momentum of China-ROK relations.
我们希望利用此次文在寅总统来中国出席中日韩领导人会议的重要契机，与韩方就双方共同关心的问题进行深入沟通。
We hope to take President Moon's attendance at the meeting as an opportunity to hold in-depth communication with the ROK on issues of mutual interest.
相信文在寅总统会对中方周到妥善安排感到满意。
We believe President Moon will be satisfied with China's thoughtful and proper arrangements.
问：7日，美军印太司令部司令戴维森就南海、知识产权、5G网络等议题发表攻击中国的言论，称这些领域存在“中国威胁”。
The commander of United States Indo-Pacific Command Philip Davidson attacked China and described threats from it in South China Sea, intellectual property, 5G network, etc.
戴还称，中国政府给新疆维吾尔族人带去了痛苦。
He added that the Chinese government resulted in the suffering of the Uighurs in the Xinjiang.
今天美国驻华大使也发声明呼吁中国改善新疆少数民族人权状况。
Just today, US Ambassador to China Terry Branstad in a statement mentioned ethnic minorities in Xinjiang and called on China to improve their human rights situation.
答：美方有关人士的言论，再次提醒我们这样一个事实：美国不仅是当今世界的超级大国，还是超级谎言制造者和散播者。
The remarks made by relevant people on the US side once again remind us of the fact that the US is not only a superpower in today's world, but also a super liar.
美方一些人对中国新疆维吾尔族表现出了异乎寻常的关心，但他们似乎忘记了，美国是这个世界上唯一针对穆斯林群体颁布“禁穆令”的国家；近年来美国以反恐为由，在伊拉克、叙利亚、利比亚、阿富汗等国挑起战乱，造成数以百万计无辜民众伤亡，而这些遭殃的国家无一例外都是穆斯林国家。
Certain people in the US show unusual concern over Uighurs in China's Xinjiang, but they seem to forget that the United States is the only country that issued a Muslim ban. In recent years, the United States started warfare in Iraq, Syria, Libya and Afghanistan under the pretext of counter-terrorism, killing and injuring millions of innocent people. These countries are literally all Muslim countries.
根据美方自己的调查结果，75%的美国成年穆斯林表示美国社会存在大量对穆斯林的歧视，69%的普通公众也持相同观点。
According to US survey results, three-quarters of Muslim American adults say there is "a lot" of discrimination against Muslims in the United States, a view shared by 69 percent of adults in the general public.
50%的美国穆斯林认为，近年来在美国做一名穆斯林变得更加困难。
In addition, half of U.S. Muslim adults say that in recent years it has become more difficult to be a Muslim in the United States.
穆斯林一直都是美国最受歧视的群体。
Muslims have all along been the most discriminated group in the US.
根据美国伊斯兰关系委员会2018年4月发布的报告，2016年以来，美国反穆斯林团体的数量激增2倍。2017年美国反穆斯林事件中，三分之一以上受联邦政府机构煽动。
The Council on American-Islamic Relations(CAIR) civil rights report in April 2018 finds that federal government agencies have instigated more than a third of all anti-Muslim incidents in 2017.
2018年美国中期选举中，超过三分之一的候选人声称穆斯林天生暴力或构成迫在眉睫的威胁，将近三分之一的候选人呼吁剥夺穆斯林的基本权利或宣称伊斯兰教不是宗教。
In the 2018 US midterm elections, more than a third candidates claimed that Muslims are inherently violent or pose an imminent threat, and around a third of the candidates have called for Muslims to be denied basic rights or declared that Islam is not a religion.
由此可见，国际社会有充分理由对美国的穆斯林政策，包括美国国内的穆斯林人权状况感到强烈关切和担忧。
Considering all this, the international community has every reason to raise concerns and worries about US Muslim policy, including the human rights situation of Muslims in the US.
我还想说，维吾尔族是中国56个民族大家庭的一员，维吾尔族人民和中国其他55个民族人民就像石榴籽一样紧紧地团结在一起，过着越来越好的生活，充分享受着中国宪法赋予的各项权利和自由。
The Uighur ethnicity is part of the big family consisting of 56 ethnic groups in China, tightly united together like the seeds of a pomegranate. They are living a better life and fully enjoy the freedom and rights.
中国同世界上的广大穆斯林国家也拥有友好紧密的关系。
China also enjoys friendly and close relations with the vast majority of Muslim countries in the world.
对于这些，美方羡慕是可以理解的，但是如果美方造谣、抹黑、污蔑，这是不能接受的。
It is understandable for the US to be envious. However, it is unacceptable if it is spreading rumors to smear and slander us.
问：据悉，11月27日土耳其政府与利比亚民族团结政府签署划分海上边界谅解备忘录，引发希腊强烈关注。
On November 27, the Turkish government and Libya's Government of National Accord signed a memorandum of understanding on the delimitation of maritime jurisdiction areas, which has drawn strong reaction from Greece.
12月6日，希腊政府宣布驱逐利比亚驻希大使。
On December 6, the Greek government has ordered the expulsion of the Libyan ambassador.
请问中方对此有何看法？
What is China's reaction to this?
答：中方注意到近期东地中海局势发展以及土耳其与利比亚签署海上划界谅解备忘录引起了希腊方面的关切。
The Chinese side has noticed the recent developments of events concerning the situation in the Mediterranean and the memorandum signed between Turkey and Libya on the delimitation of maritime jurisdiction areas. We also noted the Greek side's concern over this.
中方希望有关方面保持冷静克制，通过对话协商解决分歧。
We hope that the relevant parties could remain calm and restrained, work to resolve their differences through dialogue and consultation and help maintain regional stability.
问：12月9日,世界反兴奋剂机构作出决定,禁止俄罗斯在今后四年内参与重大国际体育赛事。
The World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) ruled on December 9 to ban Russia from major international sporting events for four years.
俄总统、总理、外长相继表态，认为相关机构近年来针对俄方反复出台各种制裁决定，此次禁令是西方国家孤立俄的又一次尝试。
Russia's president, prime minister and foreign minister all said that the agency has imposed many sanctions on Russia. This ban is yet another attempt by Western powers to isolate Russia.
请问中方对此有何评论?
Do you have a comment?
答：我们注意到了世界反兴奋剂机构对俄罗斯作出的禁赛裁决以及俄罗斯方面对此作出的回应。
We note WADA's ban on Russia and response from the Russian side.
俄罗斯是国际奥林匹克大家庭的重要成员，有大量热爱奥林匹克事业、健康向上的高水平运动员，为推动奥林匹克事业发展作出了积极贡献。
Russia is an important member of the international Olympic community. It is home to many passionate and excellent athletes who have greatly contributed to the Olympic cause.
中国政府历来高度重视反兴奋剂工作，对使用兴奋剂采取“零容忍”态度。
The Chinese government attaches high importance to anti-doping and holds a zero-tolerance attitude.
同时，我们反对将体育赛事“政治化”,主张保护各国干净运动员的合法权益，真正维护国际体育运动的公正、公平与纯洁。
We hope sporting events will not be politicized and clean athletes' lawful rights will be protected to uphold the fairness, justice and purity of international sports games.
问：近期，一些美国学者在各种场合谈到了中国的发展，并批评特朗普政府对华政策。
Some US scholars recently talked about China's development on various occasions and criticized Trump administration's China policy.
美国前常务副国务卿、世界银行前行长佐利克称，美中对抗将造成不可计数的代价和危险。
Former US Deputy Secretary of State and former president of the World Bank Group Robert B. Zoellick said a slide into China-US conflict would lead to incalculable costs and dangers.
哥伦比亚大学可持续发展中心主任萨克斯撰文称，中国追求自身发展具有正当合理性，对华“贸易战”无益于解决美自身问题。
Director Jeffrey Sachs of the Center for Sustainable Development at Columbia University wrote in an article that China's pursuit of development is legitimate and a trade war against China is no good for the US.
纽约大学名誉教授布雷默在题为“美国秩序的终结”演讲中提到，中国的增长支持了全球的增长，我们应当期待中国成功。
Emeritus Professor of New York University Ian Bremmer said in his speech "The End of the American Order" that China's development has supported global growth and we should look forward to China's success.
答：我也看到了有关报道。
I noted media reports on that.
的确，一段时间以来，美方一些战略界学术界重要人士多次公开指出，美方应该正确看待中国的发展和内外政策，呼吁中美加强交流合作、避免冲突对抗，这些声音是客观理性的。
Indeed, as many prominent American strategic advisers and scholars openly pointed out, the US needs to view China's development and domestic and foreign policy in a fair manner. They have called for greater exchange and cooperation between China and the US instead of conflict and confrontation. Their voices are objective and rational.
正如我们看到的，近来，美国内有一些人不断抛出所谓的“脱钩”、“筑墙”、“文明冲突”、“新冷战”等论调，不断攻击抹黑中国，甚至将矛头指向中国的执政党和中国的国家制度，企图在中美两国之间散布敌意、挑起冲突，这些行径不仅引起了中国人民的强烈愤慨，也引起了美国各界有识之士的警惕和反感。
As we can see, some in the US have been smearing China under the pretext of "decoupling", "building walls", "clash of civilizations", "new Cold War" and others. They even attempt to spread hostility and incite confrontation by accusing China's political party and social system. It has triggered not only indignation of the Chinese people, but also alert and aversion of people from various sectors in the US.
我们多次指出，中美关系不是零和游戏，中美两国利益高度交融、合作领域广阔，合作比摩擦好，对话比对抗好，双方完全可以实现相互促进、共同发展。
As we repeatedly pointed out, the China-US relationship is not a zero-sum game. As our two countries have highly intertwined interests and a wide range of areas for cooperation, collaboration and dialogue is better than friction and confrontation.
我们希望中美双方各界人士都能够加强沟通和交流，增进了解和互信，减少误解和误判。
We hope people from all sectors in China and the US can enhance communication, exchange, mutual understanding and trust and reduce misunderstanding and miscalculation.
我们也希望美当政者能够静下心来听一听美国各界有识之士的理性声音，摒弃冷战思维，与中方共同努力，推动中美关系健康稳定发展。
We also hope the US politicians can heed the rational call of people with vision in the US, denounce the Cold-War mentality, and work with China for the sound and stable development of bilateral relations.
这不仅是中美两国的民心所向，也是国际社会的普遍期待。
This will meet the aspiration of our two peoples as well as the common aspiration of the world.
问：关于新西兰怀特岛火山喷发，有报道称有中国人受伤，你能否证实并进一步介绍有关情况？
A question on the volcano eruption on White Island in New Zealand. Reports say there are Chinese nationals injured. Could you confirm and share more information?
答：根据我们了解，新西兰北部怀特岛火山喷发造成至少5人死亡、8人失踪、30余人受伤。
The volcano eruption on White Island has caused 5 deaths, with 8 people missing and more than 30 injured.
中国驻新西兰大使馆已确认有2名中国公民在事件中受伤。
The Chinese embassy in New Zealand has confirmed two Chinese nationals injured.
事发后，中国驻新西兰使馆第一时间启动应急机制，多方核实灾害涉中国公民情况，并派人赶赴医院看望伤者。
Upon learning the volcanic eruption, the embassy immediately activated its emergency response mechanism, worked to verify information involving Chinese nationals and visited those hospitalized for injuries.
使馆网站已发布消息，提醒在新西兰中国公民注意防范自然灾害影响。
The embassy has put up information on its website, warning Chinese citizens in New Zealand to take precautions against natural disasters.
我们将继续与新方保持密切沟通，希新方继续全力救治伤员，搜寻失踪人员。
The Chinese government is deeply saddened by the disaster and expresses sincere condolences to the victims. We hope New Zealand will do its best to treat the injured, search for those unaccounted for, and confirm with the Chinese side information on Chinese casualties as soon as possible.
在此我们也提醒赴海外旅行的中国公民，密切关注目的地安全状况，提前规划和调整行程。
I would like to remind Chinese citizens traveling overseas to closely monitor safety conditions at their destinations and plan or adjust their itinerary in advance.
问：你昨天说，新疆教育培训中心的人数是动态的，无法提供具体数字。
As you said yesterday, the figures of those who are in the vocational training and education centers are dynamic with people coming and leaving, so no precise number can be provided.
那么能不能公布另一个数字，那就是新疆现在有多少个教育培训中心？
But could you tell us how many such centers are there in Xinjiang?
答：我先问问你，关于我昨天说到的那两个暴恐纪录片，还有昨天上午国新办举行的发布会，你们报道了没有？报得怎么样？（记者：有报道，但不是我报的。）
My question for you first. For the two documentaries about terrorist attacks in Xinjiang I mentioned yesterday, and the press conference held by the Information Office of the State Council, have you covered them? How is your reporting?
我希望你们的报道能让中国民众对你所在的新闻机构产生更多信任和好感。
I hope your reports will earn your agency more trust and affinity from the Chinese people.
在涉疆问题上如何报道、能不能真正秉持客观公正的立场，其实是对你们新闻媒体自身信誉度的考验，或者说一个试金石。你同不同意？
Whether your reports on Xinjiang can be truly objective and unbiased is a litmus test for your credibility as a media agency, don't you agree?
至于你提到的数字问题，这也代表了西方媒体的关注。
As for the number you asked, I know many Western media are focusing on that, too.
新疆方面负责人昨天介绍了新疆民族团结、社会稳定、经济发展各方面情况，但是你们只关注教培中心这一个点。
Yesterday the Xinjiang authorities talked about ethnic solidarity, social stability and economic growth, but you seem to be paying attention to nothing else but the number.
昨天的发布会其实已回答了这个问题，你们有记者去的话其实应该得到了答案。
This question was actually replied at the IOSC press conference and you should have got the answer if you or your colleagues were there yesterday.
据我了解，参加职业技能教育培训中心的人数的确是动态的，有出有进。
As I know, the number of people in the vocational education and training centers is not fixed because people get in and out all the time.
下一步，为满足基层干部群众提高素质的愿望，新疆将本着尊重意愿、自主选择、分类培训、来去自由的原则，对有意愿、有需求的村干部、农村党员、农牧民、初高中未就业毕业生等进行日常性、常态化、开放式的教育培训，内容包括国家通用语言文字、法律知识、职业技能等，根据培训内容，时间可长可短。
In the next phase, to help local community officials and residents get better skills and knowledge as they aspire for, the Xinjiang authorities will provide regular and open educational training programs to village officials, Party members in rural areas, farmers, herdsmen and unemployed high school graduates based on principles of respect for their will, independent decision, categorized training programs and freedom to join or leave. The courses include standard spoken and written language, knowledge about the law, vocational skills, etc. The duration of the training period will depend on the specific courses. It could be long, and it could be short.
问：12月4日，哈萨克斯坦总统托卡耶夫在访问德国前夕接受德媒采访，就涉疆问题表示，在新疆生活的是中国公民。
On December 4, Kazakh President Tokayev had an interview with German press before heading for Germany. On issues relating to Xinjiang, he said that those living in Xinjiang are Chinese citizens.
某些国际人权组织提供的信息并不属实，是在蓄意炒作涉哈族人问题。
Some international human rights organizations have offered false information and they are exploiting and sensationalizing the situation of the ethnic Kazakh minority on purpose.
哈方清楚，这是地缘政治的一部分，因为中美在贸易战中相互碰撞，但哈不应成为所谓“全球反华统一战线”的一部分。
He said that Kazakhstan knows very well that this is all part of the geopolitics and the result of the frictions between China and the US in their trade war. But that should not drag Kazakhstan into the global anti-China front.
新疆设立的是再教育学校，那些关于“中国将所有哈族人都赶到‘集中营’”的说法也与事实不符。
What has been set up in Xinjiang are education and training institutions, and those claims that China has looped all the ethnic Kazakhs in the "concentration camps" could not be further from the truth.
中国哈族人首先是中国公民，在新疆发生的事是中国内政。
The ethnic Kazakhs in China are first and foremost Chinese citizens and what happens in Xinjiang is China's internal affairs.
根据国际法和哈中两国协议，哈方无权干涉中国内政，同样，中国也没有干涉过哈方内政。
According to international law and agreements between the two sides, Kazakhstan has no right to interfere in China's internal affairs, just like China has never interfered in the internal affairs of Kazakhstan.
中国如何评价哈总统上述表态？
What is your comment on these remarks of the Kazakh President?
答：我们高度赞赏托卡耶夫总统客观公正的表态。中国和哈萨克斯坦是友好邻邦和永久全面战略伙伴。
China and Kazakhstan are friendly neighbors that have forged a permanent comprehensive strategic partnership.
托卡耶夫总统今年9月访华取得了丰硕成果，两国领导人重申中哈要加强相互支持，深化共建“一带一路”合作，致力于实现共同发展和繁荣。
President Tokayev's visit to China this September was very fruitful, during which the two presidents reaffirmed stronger support to each other and pledged to deepen cooperation on the Belt and Road Initiative for common development and prosperity.
托卡耶夫总统就涉疆问题作出上述表态，不仅体现了两国的传统友好和高水平互信，也有力地驳斥了个别国家的不实之词。
President Tokayev's remarks on the relevant issue showcased the traditional friendship and high-level mutual trust between the two countries. His words also made a strong rebuff to the falsehoods told by some countries.
公道自在人心，中国政府的治疆政策获得了国际社会的普遍积极评价。
People can tell right from wrong. The Xinjiang-related policies the Chinese government has rolled out have won positive comments across the international community. Some countries have been making an issue of Xinjiang.
个别国家拿涉疆问题大做文章，完全违背事实，违背国际社会主流民意，这种卑劣图谋是不可能得逞的。
They have gone so astray from facts and the mainstream opinion of the international community that their attempts will never succeed.
问：还是关于康明凯和迈克尔，你刚才说，他们两人获得了领事探视。但他们是否被允许见律师和家人？
A quick follow-up on the earlier question regarding Michael Kovrig and Michael Spavor. You said in your response they had been given consular access, but had they been allowed to see lawyers and family members?
答：我刚才已经说了，中方司法机关依法办案，并切实保障了康明凯和迈克尔的合法权利。
Like I said, China's judicial authorities handle cases in strict accordance with law and protect Michael Kovrig and Michael Spavor's lawful rights.
至于你提到的司法办案方面的具体专业问题，司法机关按照法定程序办理案件。
As to specific questions regarding judicial procedures, the judicial authorities handle cases according to legal proceedings.
2019年12月9日外交部发言人华春莹主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Hua Chunying's Regular Press Conference on December 9, 2019
应国家主席习近平邀请，密克罗尼西亚联邦总统戴维·帕努埃洛将于12月11日至18日对中国进行国事访问。
At the invitation of President Xi Jinping, President David W. Panuelo of the Federated States of Micronesia (FSM) will pay a state visit to China from December 11 to 18.
这是帕努埃洛总统就任以来首次访华。
This will be the first visit to China since President David W. Panuelo took office.
访问期间，习近平主席将同他会谈，李克强总理将同他会见。
During the visit, President Xi will hold talks with President David W. Panuelo and Premier Li Keqiang will meet with him.
两国领导人将就双边关系以及共同关心的国际和地区问题深入交换意见。
The leaders of the two countries will exchange views on bilateral relations and international and regional issues of mutual interest.
除北京外，帕努埃洛总统还将访问海南和广东。
Besides Beijing, President David W. Panuelo will also visit Hainan and Guangdong.
今年是中密建交30周年。
This year marks the 30 anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic ties between China and the FSM.
30年来，中密关系取得长足发展，各领域交流合作成果丰硕。
The past three decades witnessed substantial progress in our bilateral relations and fruitful outcomes in exchange and cooperation in various fields.
2018年11月，两国领导人一致同意将中密关系提升为相互尊重、共同发展的全面战略伙伴关系，开启了两国关系新篇章。
In November 2018, the leaders of the two countries agreed to elevate China-FSM relations to comprehensive strategic partnership featuring mutual respect and common development, opening a new chapter for bilateral relations.
中方愿同密方一道，以此访为契机，增进政治互信，加强务实合作，深化人文交流，推动中密全面战略伙伴关系迈上新台阶，更好造福两国人民。
Taking President David W. Panuelo's visit as an opportunity, China stands ready to work with the FSM to enhance political mutual trust, step up practical cooperation and deepen people-to-people exchange to scale new heights in China-FSM comprehensive strategic partnership and deliver more benefits to our two peoples.
问：近期，联合国等机构或组织发布报告和评论，指出美国和欧盟一些国家存在侵犯人权问题，包括非法关押大量移民儿童，频繁发生侵犯儿童权益情形。
Recently, the UN, among other agencies and organizations, released reports and made remarks, pointing to human rights abuse in the US and some EU countries, including massive illegal detainment of immigrant children and frequent infringements on children's rights.
答：中方高度关注联合国有关报告和评论，对美国和欧盟一些国家侵犯人权事件感到震惊，深表关切。
China pays close attention to the relevant UN reports and remarks. We are shocked and deeply concerned about the human rights abuse in the US and EU countries.
近来美国和欧盟一些国家人权状况日益恶化，贫富分化日益严重，种族歧视、排外等问题变本加厉。
Recently, the human rights situation in the US and some EU countries has worsened with widening wealth disparity and aggravated discrimination and xenophobia.
美国还有数以万计的儿童移民被强行关押，“骨肉分离”政策酿出大量人间惨剧。
Tens of thousands of immigrant children are held in the US and the family seperation policy has caused many tragedies.
正如联合国人权高专所言，美国关押儿童移民的做法可能构成国际法所禁止的“残忍、不人道或有辱人格的待遇”。
Just as the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights pointed out, the detention of immigrant children in the United States may constitute cruel, inhumane and degrading treatment banned by international law.
保护人权不应只是挂在嘴上的事，更不应成为用来干涉别国内政的借口，而应该是各国实实在在的负责任的行动。
Protecting human rights is tangible responsible action rather than lip service or an excuse for interference.
明天就是世界人权日了，我们希望美方能够以此为契机，履行人权承诺，切实保障各群体特别是弱势群体的基本权利，真正为本国和国际人权事业发展做些实事。
Tomorrow marks the Human Rights Day. We hope the US will take this opportunity to implement its pledges to human rights, safeguard the basic rights of all groups especially the underprivileged, and make concrete contributions to the cause of human rights both at home and beyond.
问：今天，新西兰一座岛屿发生火山喷发，造成游客失踪、受伤甚至死亡，是否有中国游客受到影响？
A question on New Zealand. Tourists are believed to be missing, injured or even dead after a volcano erupted on Monday on an island. Can you confirm Chinese nationals are among the tourists affected by the situation?
答：我们注意到新西兰怀特岛火山喷发有关报道。
We noted reports on the volcano eruption on White Island.
我们也注意到，新西兰方面刚刚召开新闻发布会介绍有关情况，警方已确认1人死亡，多人受伤失踪，尚无中国公民伤亡和报案。
We also noticed that New Zealand just held a news briefing on that. Police confirmed that one was dead with many others injured and missing. No casualties of Chinese nationals have been reported so far.
目前，中国驻新西兰使领馆正与新方保持密切联系，及时跟踪了解最新情况。
The Chinese diplomatic mission in New Zealand remains in close contact with New Zealand and closely monitors the situation.
问：12月5日和7日，中国国际电视台先后播出了两部以新疆反恐为主题的英文纪录片《中国新疆，反恐前沿》和《幕后黑手——“东伊运”与新疆反恐》，受到国内外观众关注，但一贯关注涉疆新闻的西方主流媒体这次竟然选择性失语，集体沉默。
On December 5 and 7, CGTN streamed two English documentaries, namely "Fighting terrorism in Xinjiang" and "The black hand– the East Turkistan Islamic Movement and terrorism in Xinjiang", drawing attention from at home and abroad. However, western mainstream media, who were very vocal about Xinjiang-related issues, all turn a blind eye and remain silent this time.
请问发言人有何评论？
What's your comment?
答：你这个问题提得非常好。
That's a good question.
我想做一个现场调查，在座的外国记者朋友们，你们当中有谁看过这两部纪录片吗？看过的请举手。
I want to do a survey on the spot. How many of you, my foreign friends from the press, have watched these two documentaries?
(无人举手)有人看过吗？没有，你们居然都没有看。
Please raise your hand. Any one? No. None of you, actually.
我感到很失望。
I'm disappointed.
这很好地回答了为什么西方主流媒体集体失声、选择性失语，大多数西方媒体都没有报道此事。
This well explains why the western mainstream media go silent and skip it.
我注意到其实路透社、法广和《每日电讯报》还是有简短报道。
I noticed Reuters, France Radio International and The Daily Telegraph in fact made brief report.
今天上午，《纽约时报》、美联社、德国电视二台、法新社、日本广播协会、日本经济新闻都去参加了国新办举办的介绍新疆稳定发展有关情况发布会，你们也都没有报吗？你们能不能坦率地告诉我，你们为什么没有报道？
This morning, New York Times, AP, ZDF, AFP, NHK and NIKKEI attended the press briefing on Xinjiang's situation held by the Information Office of the State Council, but none of you covered that, did you? Can you tell me frankly why it wasn't reported?
你们不是告诉我们，你们一直秉持客观、公正、全面的立场吗？你们非常关心涉疆问题。
Haven't you always upheld the principle of objective, comprehensive and fair reporting? You are very interested in Xinjiang-related issues.
当有一些别有用心的撒谎者撒着关于涉疆问题的弥天大谎的时候，你们趋之若鹜，而当新疆的事实和真相展现在你们的面前时，你们却唯恐避之不及。
When those ill-intentioned spread lies about Xinjiang, you flock to hear them. But when the facts and truth are readily available at hand, you sidestep it and look the other way.
这是为什么？你们在担心什么？你们在害怕什么？你们难道真的不愿意静下心来认真地做一些反思吗？
Why is that? What are you worried about? What are you afraid of? Don't you feel like doing some soul-searching about the underlying problems?
你们没有看过这两部片子，我看过了，心情非常的沉痛。
You didn't watch those documentaries. I did, and got saddened by them.
《中国新疆，反恐前沿》这部纪录片还原了2009年乌鲁木齐7·5事件、2013年北京“10·28”暴恐案以及2014年昆明“3·1“暴恐案等部分的原始视频，用大量的客观事实记录了中国为了应对“三股势力”威胁所付出的努力和牺牲。
"Fighting terrorism in Xinjiang" features original video footage of terrorist attacks including Urumqi riots on July 5, 2009, the terrorist attack in Beijing on October 28 and another attack in Kunming on March 1, 2014, capturing China's efforts and sacrifices in dealing with the threat of the "three evil forces" with numerous objective facts.
另一部纪录片《幕后黑手——“东伊运”与新疆反恐》则以严酷的事实细致地展现了“东伊运”的种种恶行，包括灌输极端思想、煽动民族仇恨、毒害妇女儿童、制造暴恐事件等，以无可辩驳的事实，揭露了“东伊运”是国际恐怖主义的组成部分，它威胁的不仅仅是中国新疆地区的安全和稳定，也在损害着地区国家的共同安全。
Another documentary "The black hand– the East Turkistan Islamic Movement and terrorism in Xinjiang", with harsh, detailed facts, reveals the evil deeds of the ETIM, including spreading extremist ideology, fueling ethnic hatred, victimize women and children, launching terrorist attacks, etc. They present indisputable facts that the ETIM is part of the international terrorist system, which threatens not only security and stability of China's Xinjiang, but also the common security of regional countries.
特别令人发指和让人心痛的是，纪录片中有一段“东伊运”成员拍摄的视频，恐怖分子强迫自己6岁的儿子学习开枪。
It is particularly hair-raising and heartbreaking when you watch the part which shows a video filmed by ETIM members. In that video, a terrorist forced his six-year-old son to learn shooting.
虽然孩子连声说不，但还是在他父亲的威逼下拿起了枪。
The child said "no" again and again but was eventually forced to pick up the gun.
当扳机扣动的一瞬间，枪声和哭声一同响起。
When he pulled the trigger, we heard both the gun shot and crying.
另外还有一段视频，“东伊运”展示了儿童使用遥控装置引爆带有“中国警察”字样的车辆的模型。
There's another video filmed by the ETIM showing children using remote controls to detonate models of vehicles with "China Police" written on them.
这些铁一样的事实表明，“东伊运”为了他们的暴恐活动，连妇女儿童都不放过。
Those iron-clad facts tell us the simple truth that the ETIM wouldn't even spare women and children in violent and terrorist activities.
面对这样的事实，西方主流媒体和美国以及一些欧洲国家的那些对中国治疆政策横加指责的人，他们难道真的可以无动于衷吗？他们的良心没有受到任何谴责吗？
When faced with those facts, I'm asking the mainstream Western media and those in the US and some European countries accusing China's Xinjiang policy, can you really stay apathetic? Don't you feel condemned by your conscience?
我想强调的是，不管你们报还是没有报，不管你们想报还是不想报，关于新疆的事实和真相都在那里。
I'd like to stress that the truth and facts about Xinjiang are right there, no matter you want to report it or not, and no matter you have reported or not.
谎言终究遮盖不了真相，就像乌云遮挡不了太阳。
Lies cannot hide the truth, just like the clouds cannot hide the sun.
我想作为媒体，你们应该有这样的社会责任，客观公正地向你们的读者和观众呈现最基本的事实和真相，而不是先入为主、选择性失聪、失明，误导受众。
As you work in the press, I believe it is your social responsibility to present the basic facts and truth in a fair and just manner instead of making preconceptions, remaining deaf and blind to facts and misleading your readers.
我已经注意到，不仅是中国国内的媒体，还有一些国外社交媒体上的外国普通读者，都已经对这一现象作出了强烈反应。
I noted earlier that both Chinese media and foreign social network users expressed strong responses to this phenomenon.
作为媒体人，你们应该有这样的责任。
I believe you should have some responsibilities as reporters and journalists.
我希望你们回去好好看一下这两部片子。我希望你们能好好地看一看、想一想，客观地报一报。
I hope you can watch the documentaries, think about them and report them objectively.
如果有需要的话，也欢迎你们回来和我们交流一下你们的感想。
You are also welcome to talk to us about your takeaway.
我期待着看到你们真正的全面、客观和公正的报道。
I look forward to your truly comprehensive, impartial and unbiased reports.
问：据报道，随着美国行使否决权并阻止任命新法官取代两名任期已满的法官，世贸组织争端解决机制上诉机构将无法发挥作用。
It is reported that as the US exercises veto power to block the appointment of judges to replace those whose terms are up, the DSM appellate body of the WTO won't be able to play its due role.
中方对此有何评论？
I wonder if you have a comment on that?
答：争端解决机制是世贸组织三大支柱之一，被称为“世贸组织皇冠上的明珠”，对于世贸组织履行职能具有关键作用。
The Dispute Settlement Mechanism (DSM), often referred to as the "crown jewel", is one of the three pillars of the WTO that plays a key role in the organization.
由于美方持续阻挠上诉机构遴选，上诉机构将于明天之后仅剩1名法官。
As the US has been blocking the DSM appointment process, after tomorrow there will be only one judge in the mechanism, leaving it in a condition where it cannot normally function.
这将导致争端解决机制难以正常运转，这将严重损害多边贸易体制的权威性和有效性。
This seriously undermines the authority and efficacy of a multilateral trading system.
美国这种破坏多边贸易体制的行为受到了绝大多数世贸组织成员的谴责。
Such behavior is condemned by most WTO members.
在近期举行的二十国集团外长会和协调人会议上，各方普遍对此表达严重关切，呼吁尽快采取行动，将多边贸易体制从危机中挽救出来。
In the recent G20 foreign ministers' meeting and Sherpa meeting, all sides expressed deep concerns and called for immediate actions to save the multilateral trading system from a crisis.
中方坚定维护多边贸易体制，一直在积极推动解决上诉机构遴选僵局。
China, as a staunch defender of the multilateral trading system, has been working to resolve the stalemate in the Appellate Body appointment.
中方与115个世贸组织成员提交了关于启动上诉机构遴选的提案，联合欧盟等40个成员提交了关于上诉机构改革的提案，争取凝聚各方共识，持续推动相关问题解决。
China and other 115 WTO members submitted a proposal of relaunching the appointment. China also submitted a proposal of the Appellate Body reform with other 40 members including the EU. We are trying to consolidate consensus and working for a solution.
现在，上诉机构这颗“明珠”陷入了黑暗，陷入了危机，但各方维护多边贸易体制的努力不会止步。
The Appellate Body – the "crown jewel", – is now in a crisis, but our efforts to safeguard the multilateral trading system will not stop.
中方将与志同道合的绝大多数成员一道，继续推动解决上诉机构面临的挑战。
China will continue to work with other like-minded members – which are the majority of the WTO members – to address the challenges.
同时，我们也正在研究维护世贸组织争端解决机制运转的应对方案，捍卫世贸组织的权威性和有效性。
In the meantime, we are working on a solution that can keep the DSM operating, so that the authority and efficacy of the WTO can be upheld.
问：7日，美国国防部长埃斯珀发表演讲时表示，“修正主义大国”俄罗斯、中国正寻求对小国经济和安全决策的否决权。
Defense Secretary Mark Esper said today's revisionist powers China and Russia are seeking "veto power" over the economic and security decisions of smaller nations.
中国年度军费增至2002年的3倍，估计接近2500亿美元。
China tripled its annual military spending since 2002 with estimates close to 250 billion dollars last year.
中国继续侵犯印太国家主权。
Beijing continues to violate the sovereignty of Indo Pacific Nations.
尽管中东面临安全威胁增多，他仍拟将美军事重心转移至同中俄竞争。
He still plans to shift the American military's focus to competing with China and Russia, even as security threats pile up in the Middle East.
答：根据公开资料，美国2019年军费预算超过7160亿美元，是2002年军费的2倍多，占世界军费总开支的40%以上，相当于美国后面9个国家军费开支的总和。
According to public information, the US military budget for 2019 tops $716 billion, more than double that of 2002, accounting for over 40% of the world's total military expenditure and equivalent to the total of the nine countries next to the US.
美国2019年国防预算占GDP的比重是3.5%,而中国近30年每年国防开支占GDP比例不到2%，不仅低于世界主要国家，也低于2.6%的世界平均水平。
The US defense budget accounts for 3.5% of its GDP in 2019, while China's annual defense expenditure accounted for less than 2% of its GDP in the past 30 years, which is lower than not only the world's major countries, but also the world average of 2.6%.
中国人均军费支出更低，仅占美国的1/22，英国的1/9，日本的1/5。
China's per capita military spending is even lower, only accounting for 1/22 of America's, one ninth of Britain's and one fifth of Japan's.
美国在全世界拥有数百个军事基地，在建国240多年历史中仅有16年没有打过仗。
With hundreds of military bases around the world, the United States has been war-free for only 16 of its 240-plus years of existence.
美国强行推行“政权更迭”、煽动“颜色革命”，动辄极限施压，造成了多少地区的动荡，造成了多少人民的苦难，伊拉克、阿富汗、叙利亚、委内瑞拉等例子数不胜数。
The US has imposed "regime change", instigated "color revolutions" and exerted maximum pressure, thus causing regional instability and untold suffering for the people in Iraq, Afghanistan, Syria and Venezuela. The list goes on.
我想强调，中国坚持走和平发展道路，奉行防御性国防政策。
I want to stress that China adheres to the path of peaceful development and pursues a national defense policy that is defensive in nature.
中国国防力量的发展，是维护自身主权、安全和发展利益的需要，是维护自身国家统一、领土完整的需要，也是维护国际和地区和平与安全的需要。
The development of China's national defense strength is out of the need to safeguard China's national unity, territorial integrity and development interests, as well as international and regional peace and security.
我们始终奉行独立自主的和平外交政策，我们主张大小国家一律平等，我们从不干涉别国内政，从来都反对以大欺小，反对恃强凌弱，反对强加于人。
We pursue an independent foreign policy of peace. We believe that all countries, big or small, are equal. We never interfere in the internal affairs of other countries, and oppose the practice of the big and strong bullying the small and weak and the imposition of one's own will on others.
威胁恐吓讹诈从来都不是中国的政策，也不是中国的喜好和强项。
China has never threatened, intimidated or extorted others. Such practices are not to our liking, nor are we good at them.
当前世界和平稳定面临的最大威胁，恰恰是单边主义在破坏着国际秩序、霸凌行径在挑战着国际关系准则。
The biggest threat to world peace and stability is precisely unilateralism and bullying, which undermine the current international order and challenge the norms governing international relations.
我们奉劝美方摒弃过时的冷战零和思维，不要再到处寻找和制造敌人。
We urge the US to abandon the outdated cold-war, zero-sum mentality and refrain from seeking and making enemies everywhere.
问：朝鲜常驻联合国代表近日表示，无核化不再是与美国谈判的议题。
DPRK's permanent representative to the UN said recently that denuclearization has "already gone out of the negotiation table".
美国总统特朗普警告称，如果朝鲜最高领导人金正恩继续采取敌对态度，恐将失去一切。
President Trump warned that Kim Jong Un has far too much to lose if he acts in a hostile way.
中方对朝美矛盾愈加激烈有何评论？韩中外长会见时，中方主张安理会应当启动缓解对朝制裁的讨论，对此各方有何反应？
How do you comment on the worsening tension between the US and the DPRK? During the meeting between foreign ministers of China and the ROK, China said the Security Council should start discussions about easing sanctions on the DPRK. How did parties respond to that?
答：我们注意到当前朝美关系再度出现了紧张。
We also noticed the renewed tension between the DPRK and the US.
当前半岛对话缓和局面来之不易，是近一段时间以来各方共同努力的结果。
The current situation of dialogue and detente on the Korean Peninsula has not come by easily and is the result of the concerted efforts of all parties.
朝美是半岛问题主要矛盾方，实现半岛无核化和持久和平需要朝美双方作出切实的共同努力。
The DPRK and the US are the major two parties to the Peninsula issue. It calls for the joint efforts of the DPRK and the US to achieve the denuclearization and enduring peace of the Korean Peninsula.
当前形势下，我们希望朝美双方珍惜难得的政治解决半岛问题机遇，珍惜业已取得的建设性成果，继续坚定致力于对话协商，保持耐心，相向而行，争取早日打破对话僵局，推动半岛问题政治解决进程取得新进展。
Under the current circumstances, we hope the DPRK and the US will cherish the hard-won opportunity for political settlement and the existing constructive results, remain committed to dialogue and consultation, maintain patience and work together to break the deadlock in dialogue at an early date for new progress in the political settlement process.
前几天，王毅国务委员访问韩国，同康京和外长就半岛问题进行了讨论，你应该已看到了有关消息稿。
A few days ago, State Councilor Wang Yi visited the ROK and had discussions with Foreign Minister Kang Kyung-wha on the Korean Peninsula issue. You may have seen the readout.
我们认为，朝鲜在安全与发展方面的合理关切应该得到重视和解决。
The DPRK's legitimate concerns on security and development deserves attention and should be addressed.
安理会应根据决议规定，并根据半岛局势的进展，启动可逆条款讨论，按照同步对等原则对制裁措施作出相应调整。
It is our consistent position that the Security Council should, in light of the evolvement of the situation on the Peninsula, begin discussing invoking relevant resolution provisions to modify sanctions according to the principle of synchronized and reciprocal steps.
要打破僵局，必须由朝美双方相向而行，作出共同努力。
To break this impasse, the DPRK and the US must work together to meet each other halfway.
问：关于新疆的问题。
A follow-up question on Xinjiang.
今天上午，在国新办举行的关于新疆的发布会上，有记者问有多少人在新疆教培中心，中方没有明确给出具体数字，而是指出数字是变化中的。
Today there was a press conference with the governor of Xinjiang. He was asked how many people are in the so-called training centers. He didn't disclose the figures. He said the figures are dynamic, and they are changing everyday.
中方可以公布这些数字吗？
Can the Chinese government publish the figures?
答：今天上午，国新办召开了新疆稳定和发展有关情况发布会，新疆自治区主席雪克来提、乌鲁木齐市委书记徐海荣等介绍了关于新疆稳定和发展情况并回答了有关问题。
This morning the State Council Information Office held a press release on stability and development in Xinjiang. Chairman Shohrat Zakir of the Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous Region, Secretary Xu Hairong of Urumqi's municipal committee of the CPC talked about and answered questions on Xinjiang's stability and development.
正如你刚才所说，由于参加教育培训的人数是动态的，有进有出，所以很难给出精准的数字。
As you just said, the figures are dynamic, with people coming and leaving. So no precise number can be provided.
但事实已经证明，正如去访问过新疆的很多人，包括我看到这几天有很多国家的各界人士都自发出来发声，勇敢地对媒体说出了他们看到的真相，对美方的污蔑和霸权行径提出了严厉批评。
However, in the past few days, people from many countries who have visited Xinjiang are bravely telling the true story to the press. They have voiced harsh criticism on the US slanders and hegemonic acts.
正如大家看到的，教培中心成效非常明显。
As we can all see, the vocational education and training centers have been very effective.
过去三年多来，新疆没有发生任何一起暴恐案件，人民的幸福感、满足感、安全感得到了空前提升。
Xinjiang has not seen a single terror attack in the past three years. People there are enjoying a higher sense of happiness, satisfaction and security than ever before.
我觉得特别重要的是，你看涉疆问题时，关注点应该放在哪里？我觉得应该重点关注新疆的事实真相。
One important point when viewing the Xinjiang-related issues is the focus. I believe the focus should be placed on the truth and facts.
是如《纽约时报》所炒作的那样，听信几个为了去国外寻求政治庇护而撒谎人的谎言而对新疆作出种种无理污蔑、抹黑、指责呢，还是应该相信中方权威部门发布的信息以及你们自己去新疆亲眼看到的？我觉得这才是问题的核心和根本。
Should you discredit and attack China based on lies fabricated by a handful of individuals seeking political asylum overseas? Or should you trust the information released by Chinese authorities and seen with your eyes?
它反映出一些媒体记者内心深处的一些东西。
That is the core and fundamental issue as it reflects something deeper in the mind of certain media and journalists.
面对谎言和真相、谬论和真理，其实你们每个媒体人都经历着良心的拷问。
When presented with lies versus truth, every journalist is facing a test of conscience.
你到底是真正的客观公正，还是选择性失聪失明？它反映的深层次东西又是什么？我期待你们的公正报道。
Are you being truly objective and just or are you being selective and partial? What does your decision reveal? I very much look forward to your coverage.
问：有印度媒体称，中印边界谈判随时可能举行。
Do you have any details about the border talks to be held between India and China? There are reports in India saying they are likely anytime.
你能否介绍有关情况和日程安排具体细节？
Do you have any schedule details on that?
答：我理解你关心的是中印边界问题特别代表会晤。
I understand you are referring to the Meeting of the Special Representatives of China and India on the Boundary Question.
中印双方一直就有关问题保持着密切沟通。我们愿同印方就边界问题特别代表会晤有关问题保持密切沟通。
The two sides have maintained close communication on relevant issues. We will stay in close touch with India regarding the Meeting of the Special Representatives of China and India on the Boundary Question.
如果有消息，我们第一时间告诉你。
We will keep you updated if there is anything new.
2019年12月6日外交部发言人华春莹主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Hua Chunying's Regular Press Conference on December 6, 2019
应阿根廷政府邀请，国家主席习近平特使、全国人大常委会副委员长艾力更·依明巴海将赴布宜诺斯艾利斯出席于12月10日举行的阿根廷新任总统费尔南德斯就职仪式。
At the invitation of the Argentine government, President Xi Jinping's Special Envoy and Vice Chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress (NPC) Arken Imirbaki will attend the inauguration ceremony of President Alberto Fernandez in Buenos Aires on December 10.
问：《纽约时报》5日公布了一个关塔那摩监狱囚犯的手绘图，展现其被关押期间遭美国中情局虐待和施加酷刑的细节，包括水刑、蹲禁闭箱、撞墙、剥夺睡眠等刑罚，其中，仅被施以水刑次数就达83次之多。
A New York Times article on December 5 showed drawings done in captivity by a Guantanamo Bay prisoner portraying details of how the CIA abused and tortured him, including waterboarding which he endured 83 times, confinement boxes, walling, sleep deprivation, etc.
答：我知道很多人都关注这篇报道。
I know this report has received a lot of attention.
这篇报道来得正是时候，这与连日来美国的一些政客、议员在涉疆问题上道貌岸然地撒着弥天大谎形成了鲜明对比和强烈讽刺，让世人进一步看清了美方在人权问题上的虚伪和丑恶。
The timing couldn't be more appropriate. What it describes stands in stark contrast with the sanctimonious and shameless lies of some US lawmakers and politicians on issues relating to Xinjiang. The strong irony also exposes to the world American hypocrisy and odiousness on human rights issues.
不知道美国国会就此会采取什么行动？
I wonder if the US Congress will take any action on this?
问：近日，美国国务卿蓬佩奥与葡萄牙外长席尔瓦共见记者时称，中国政府会毫不犹豫地将华为作为获取秘密数据的工具，美一直努力确保其盟友意识到与不可信赖的电信企业合作的风险。
US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo warned at a news conference with Portuguese Foreign Minister Augusto Santos Silva that the Chinese government won't hesitate to use Huawei as a tool to steal secret data, and the US has tried for years to make clear to allies of the risks of working with unreliable telecom companies.
但席尔瓦外长说，在电信等公共招标方面将遵循欧洲规则，葡方欢迎所有外国投资。
But Foreign Minister Silva said that bids from 5G operators will be assessed in the light of EU regulations and all foreign investment is welcome in Portugal.
答：我们赞赏葡萄牙方面的公正态度。
We commend this just attitude of the Portuguese side.
美国以莫须有的罪名到处打压、封杀中国特定企业，这种赤裸裸的霸权行径已经遭到中方和其他具有正义感的国家的坚决反对。
The US has been leaving no stones unturned to oppress and strangle certain Chinese companies. Such stark bullying behavior has met firm opposition from China and other countries standing for justice.
在全球化时代，公平、公正、非歧视的原则对于维护国际规则及正常的经济技术合作和贸易秩序至关重要。
The principles of fairness, justice and non-discrimination are extremely important in a globalized world.
相信各国最终会从自身的根本和长远利益出发，独立自主地作出最符合自己利益的判断和选择。
We believe that all countries will make independent judgment and choices based on their fundamental and long-term interests.
问：据报道，伊核协议联委会会议6日将在维也纳召开，俄罗斯、英国、德国、中国、法国和伊朗将派代表出席会议，讨论挽救协议的可能性。
A JCPOA Joint Commission meeting will be held on December 6 in Vienna, Austria, to discuss how to salvage the international agreement, which will be attended by officials from Russia, the United Kingdom, Germany, China, France and Iran.
中方将派谁出席？对会议有何期待？
Who will represent China? Does China have any expectations?
答：伊核问题全面协议各方将于12月6日在维也纳举行全面协议联委会会议，讨论当前伊核问题形势以及全面协议执行问题。
Parties to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action will hold a Joint Commission meeting on December 6 in Vienna to discuss the current situation of the Iranian nuclear issue and the implementation of the deal.
外交部军控司负责人将率团与会。
Official in charge of the Arms Control Department of China's Ministry of Foreign Affairs will lead a delegation to the meeting.
当前伊核形势持续紧张，美国退出伊核问题全面协议并对伊朗进行极限施压是当前伊核危机的根源。
The US withdrawal from the Iranian nuclear deal and its maximum pressure campaign against Iran is the root cause of the Iranian nuclear crisis.
我们希望全面协议各方能够继续致力于完整、有效执行全面协议，恢复全面协议权利与义务的平衡。
China hopes that parties to the JCPOA will continue to work for the full and effective implementation of the deal and restore the balance of rights and obligations.
同时，我们也认为各方应保持克制，坚持在联委会框架内加强协商，化解分歧，避免采取可能导致局势进一步复杂化的举措。
At the same time, parties should exercise restraint, work to resolve differences by stepping up negotiations within the framework of the Joint Commission, and refrain from steps that could further complicate the situation.
中方将继续与各方一道，推动伊核问题政治解决。
China will continue to work with all parties to facilitate political settlement of the Iranian nuclear issue.
问：据报道，在美方取消伊朗福尔多核设施的制裁豁免以后，一家俄罗斯国有公司决定暂停与伊朗的研究项目。
A Russian state company suspended its research project with Iran after the US lifted sanctions exemption on Fordow.
中方对此有何评论？
I wonder what is your comment?
答：我刚才说了，美国不仅单方面退出伊核问题全面协议、对伊朗进行极限施压，还以国内法为依据，动辄制裁或以制裁威胁其他履行协议的负责任成员。
The US not only unilaterally pulls out of the JCPOA and imposes maximum pressure on Iran, but also wantonly sanctions and threatens to sanction other responsible parties that implement the deal in accordance with US domestic law.
美方这种单边和霸权主义的作法严重危害全面协议的执行，使危机升级，导致地区形势进一步恶化。
Such unilateral and hegemonic practice has severely compromised the implementation of the JCPOA, escalated the crisis and aggravated regional situation.
我们认为对话谈判才是解决伊核问题的真正出路。
We believe dialogue and negotiation is the only viable way out of the Iranian nuclear issue.
我们敦促美方尽快调整对伊极限施压的错误政策和作法，为各方的外交努力留出空间，为缓和地区局势创造条件。
We urge the US to adjust its wrong policy and practice of maximum pressure as soon as possible so as to make room for diplomatic efforts and create conditions for easing the regional situation.
问：今天下午，中国国务院关税税则委员会宣布将开展部分大豆、猪肉等自美采购商品的排除工作。
This afternoon the Tariff Policy Commission of the State Council announced tariff exemptions for certain purchases of soybeans and pork from the US.
中方为什么选择在今天下午公布这一消息？另外，你能否提供更多细节，比如采购数量和采购金额？
First, why was the announcement made this afternoon? Following that, can you give us more details about the volume of the purchases or perhaps the value of the purchases?
答：你的问题非常具体，这不是外交部的业务范围，请问主管部门。
You were asking about specifics. I don't think this is a question within the Foreign Ministry's scope of work, so I'd refer you to the competent authority.
问：据报道，近日，美国国会参议院外交关系委员会主席里什称，中国共产党必须为新疆严重侵犯人权的行为负责。
US Senate Foreign Relations Committee Chairman James Risch said recently that the Communist Party of China must be held accountable for severe abuses of human rights in Xinjiang.
参议员格雷厄姆称，这是21世纪，美不会容忍极权主义政权基于宗教地位设立“集中营”。
Senator Graham said that this is the 21st century and the US is not going to tolerate a totalitarian regime running concentration camps for people based on their religious status.
答：我今天上午也注意到了这个报道。
I noted the reports this morning.
我严重怀疑这些人的历史和地理常识。
These remarks lead people to doubt the speakers' common sense with regard to history and geography.
他们知道“集中营”意味着什么吗？他们知道新疆位于中国的什么地方吗？污蔑抹黑一个拥有14亿人口、已经是世界第二大经济体的国家，信口雌黄编造世纪谎言。
Do they know what concentration camps mean? Do they know in which part of China Xinjiang is located? They are fabricating the lie of the century to slander a country with 1.4 billion people and the second biggest economy in the world.
他们应该为自己的言行感到羞耻！
Shame on them!
中国是一个有着5000年文明史的古老大国。
China is a major country with a civilization of 5,000 years.
在中国960万平方公里的土地上，没有战乱恐惧，没有颠沛流离，没有难民流离失所。
Its vast land of 9.6 million square kilometers is free from war, terror and displacement.
8亿多人摆脱了贫困，经济稳定发展，社会持续进步，56个民族人民安居乐业，连续10多年对全球GDP增量贡献率高达30%以上。
Over 800 million people have got out of poverty. With steady economic development and continued social progress, people of all 56 ethnic groups have the chance to lead happy and fulfilling lives. For over ten consecutive years, China has contributed to over 30% of global GDP growth.
中国已经并且正在创造人类发展史上的奇迹，这才是最好和最伟大的人权工程和人权实践。
It has created a development miracle in human history, and today the miracle continues. This is the best and greatest human rights endeavor and practice.
中国之所以能取得如此伟大的成就，原因就在于我们找到了一条符合中国国情的、得到全体中国人民衷心拥护和支持的正确发展道路，那就是中国共产党领导的中国特色社会主义道路。
What enables us to make such great achievement? It is socialism with Chinese characteristics under the leadership of the CPC, a right path endorsed by Chinese people as it suits China's national realities.
看了这个报道以后，我特地在网上查阅了一下格雷厄姆议员2006年7月访华的相关报道。
Besides, after seeing this report, I looked for reports on Senator Graham's visit to China in July 2006.
当时，他访华之前表示将以强硬的态度要求美国就人民币汇率问题对中国进行贸易惩罚，但是他一踏上中国的大地，态度就发生了明显的变化，开始了“审慎的反思”，坦承对中国的访问是一次“大开眼界的访问”。
Before he came, he had been talking about acting tough and calling for punitive trade measures on China for the RMB exchange rate issue. However, after setting foot on Chinese soil, his attitude changed. With prudent reflection, he confessed that the visit was an eye-opening experience.
我不知道后来他有没有再来过中国？我们非常希望他能找出时间再来中国看一看，也去美丽的新疆看一看。
I don't know if he paid a second visit to China after that. But we do hope he will come again and perhaps also visit Xinjiang sometime.
我想他一定会再次大开眼界，也希望他能够再次对中国进行审慎的反思。
I'm sure he will find it eye-opening, too. I also hope he will have more prudent reflection on China this time.
问：据报道，针对美国日前对中国外交官设限的做法，中国也采取了反制措施。
Reports say China has taken countermeasures in response to US restrictions on Chinese diplomats.
你能否确认并介绍具体情况？
Could you confirm that and offer more information?
答：中方一贯支持包括美国在内的各国驻华外交领事人员依法在华开展正常公务活动，并提供必要便利。
China provides support and necessary convenience to foreign diplomatic and consular officials posted in China in carrying out their official duties.
针对今年10月美国国务院对中国驻美外交领事人员的限制措施，中方已于12月4日照会美国驻华使馆，从即日起对美方采取对等做法。
After the US State Department in October placed restrictive measures on Chinese diplomatic and consular officials posted in the US, the Chinese side has sent a note to the US embassy in China on December 4, informing it of reciprocal measures going into immediate effect.
中方将根据美方做法予以相应回应。
We will take appropriate measures in response to US actions.
我们再次敦促美方纠正错误，撤销有关决定，为中国驻美外交领事人员开展相关活动提供支持和便利。
Once again we urge the US to correct its mistake, withdraw the decision and instead provide support and convenience for Chinese diplomatic and consular officials posted in the US as they fulfill their official duties.
问：据报道，世行昨天批准未来5年每年向中国提供10-15亿美元低息贷款。
The World Bank issued a budget yesterday of 1 to 1.5 billion USD planned in low interest rate loan programs for China.
美国参议员格拉斯利称世行不应把美国纳税人的钱借给侵犯人权的富裕国家。
US Senator Grassley made a statement saying the World Bank should not be lending American tax dollars to wealthy countries that violate human rights of their citizens.
你对此有何回应？
What's your response to that?
答：关于你提到的具体问题，恐怕要向财政部去询问。
I'd refer you to the Ministry of Finance for the specifics.
作为原则，我可以告诉你，中国是世界银行重要的发展伙伴。我们与世行长期保持着良好的合作关系。
My principled answer to you is that China is an important partner of the World Bank with long-term, good cooperation.
我们愿继续深化与世行的贷款和知识合作，一起总结中国的减贫成功经验并与其他发展中国家分享，共同为支持广大发展中国家更好地实现长期可持续发展作出努力和贡献。
We'd like to deepen that cooperation with the World Bank in loans and knowledge sharing, and share our poverty alleviation experience with other developing countries to help them achieve long-term, sustainable development.
问：你刚才确认了中方将采取对等反制措施。
You just announced China took countermeasures.
这些措施是不是针对美国官员以及持外交护照的美国人？
I just want to clarify if these measures mean visa restrictions for American officials and diplomatic passport holders?
答：我们采取的措施是针对美国驻华外交领事人员的限制措施。
The countermeasures I just referred to are on US diplomatic and consular officials posted in China.
这是针对今年10月美国国务院对中国驻美外交领事人员采取的限制措施的对等回应。
They are reciprocal to the US State Department's restrictive measures imposed in October against Chinese diplomatic and consular officials posted in the US.
问：有报道称，中方要求美国驻华外交领事官员正式会见中方地方政府代表前，须提前5个工作日书面通知中国外交部，你能否证实？
Another follow-up on the countermeasures. There are reports saying specifically that it required US diplomats in China to notify the foreign ministry five working days in advance before meeting with local government officials. I just wonder if you could confirm this specifics of the countermeasures?
答：对的。
Yes.
我们采取的措施是对美国10月份对中国驻美外交领事人员采取的限制措施的对等回应。
The countermeasures are reciprocal to the US State Department's restrictive measures imposed in October against Chinese diplomatic and consular officials posted in the US.
追问：该规定何时生效？是12月4日吗？
Follow-up: When will this come into effect? Is it December 4?
答：是12月4日。
Yes, December 4.
问：12月3日，《禁止生物武器公约》2019年缔约国会议开幕。
The 2019 Meeting of States Parties to the Biological Weapons Convention (BWC) opened on December 3.
个别缔约国长期独家阻拦公约核查议定书谈判。
A certain State Party has been obstructing negotiations for a protocol with a verification regime.
你对此有何评论？中方对公约核查议定书谈判持何立场？
Do you have a comment? What's China's position on the negotiations?
答：《禁止生物武器公约》缔约国大会正在日内瓦举行。
The Meeting of States Parties to the BWC is being held in Geneva.
公约一共有183个缔约国。正如你讲到的，包括中国在内的绝大多数缔约国都主张谈判一项旨在全面加强公约，包含核查机制的议定书。
To my knowledge, the vast majority of the 183 State Parties, China included, all support negotiations for a protocol that includes a verification regime to strengthen the Convention.
但是令人遗憾的是，近20年来，美国一直独家阻挡重启核查议定书的谈判，美方给出的理由是生物领域不可核查，国际核查“可能威胁美国国家利益和商业机密”，有利于“工业间谍活动”。
Unfortunately, for almost 20 years, the US alone stood in the way of relaunching such negotiations. The excuses it has given are that bio-sector cannot be verified, and international verification may threaten US national interests and trade secrets as well as facilitate industrial espionage activities.
但让人很费解的是，中俄等国在日内瓦裁军谈判会议提出谈判“防止在外空放置武器、对外空物体使用或威胁使用武力条约”，也被美国独家阻挡，理由却是“条约草案没有包括核查条款”。
But I find it hard to understand, as the US alone also stood against China, Russia and other countries' proposal to negotiate the "Treaty on the Prevention of the Placement of Weapons in Outer Space, the Threat or Use of Force Against Outer Space Objects" (PPWT) at the Conference on Disarmament held in Geneva, citing the exact opposite excuse that the draft lacks a verification regime.
在国际安全、军控和防扩散领域，美国这种单边主义和双重标准的作法屡见不鲜，已经严重影响了现有军控和防扩散体系的有效性。
These serve to show how the US often resorts to unilateralism and double standards on issues regarding international security, arms control and non-proliferation. It has severely impacted the effectiveness of the existing arms control and non-proliferation regime.
中方一贯坚定支持《禁止生物武器公约》的宗旨和目标，支持谈判达成非歧视性的《公约》核查议定书，全面加强《公约》有效性和权威性。
China firmly supports the purposes and objectives of the BWC and supports negotiations for a non-discriminatory verification protocol to strengthen the authority and effectiveness of the Convention.
我们愿同国际社会一道，进一步深化生物安全国际合作，推动多边生物军控进程不断发展，构建全球生物安全命运共同体。
We will work with the international community to deepen international cooperation on bio-security, advance the development of multilateral biological arms control, and build a global community of a shared future for bio-security.
2019年12月5日外交部发言人华春莹主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Hua Chunying's Regular Press Conference on December 5, 2019
应中共中央政治局委员、中央外事工作委员会办公室主任杨洁篪邀请，日本国家安全保障局长北村滋将于12月5日至7日访华。
At the invitation of Yang Jiechi, member of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee and Director of the Office of the Foreign Affairs Commission of the CPC Central Committee, Shigeru Kitamura, head of the National Security Council of Japan, will visit China from December 5 to 7.
双方将举行新一轮中日高级别政治对话，就中日关系及共同关心的重要问题交换意见。
The two sides will hold a new round of China-Japan high-level political dialogue to exchange views on bilateral relations and major issues of common concern.
应缅甸国务资政兼外长昂山素季邀请，国务委员兼外交部长王毅将于12月7日至8日访问缅甸。
At the invitation of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, State Counsellor and Union Minister for Foreign Affairs of Myanmar, State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi will visit Myanmar from December 7 to 8.
问：尽管美方官员竭力游说和施压欧洲国家将中国定为“威胁”，但北约峰会4日发表《伦敦宣言》并未将中国定位为“威胁”。
Despite US officials' efforts to lobby and pressure European countries to identify China as a threat during the NATO summit, the London Declaration issued on November 4 didn't do so.
北约不具名外交官称，多数欧洲人认为这并不符合自己的国家利益。
NATO diplomats said that most Europeans know this does not represent their national interests.
北约认识到中国是崛起大国，但不意味着要把中国作为新的敌人。
NATO recognizes that China is a rising power, but it doesn't mean China is the new enemy.
答：威胁与否与个头大小并无必然联系。
Whether one poses a threat or not has nothing to do with size.
中国的确块头很大，影响力在增强，但我们坚持走和平发展道路，信奉的是天下一家、和而不同，倡导的是相互平等、相互尊重。
It is true that China is a big country with growing influence. But we are committed to peaceful development, see the whole world as one family, believe in harmony without uniformity, and uphold equality and mutual respect.
中国力量的增长是和平力量的增长，是公平正义力量的增长。
A growing China is therefore a growing force for peace, fairness and justice.
我们也注意到，北约内部也有很多不希望与中国为敌的客观理性声音。
We also noted that within NATO, there are objective and rational voices saying China is not an enemy.
事实上，当前世界面临的最大威胁和挑战是单边主义和霸凌行径，就连美国的盟友都深受其害。
As a matter of fact, the greatest threat and challenge the world faces is unilateralism and bullying practices. There is no immunity even for US allies.
问：美国国务院发言人4日发表声明称，允许华为、中兴等中国电信企业参与一国5G网络任何部分的建设，都是不安全的，都将对该国公民的隐私、人权和安全构成重大风险。
Spokesperson of the US Department of State said in a statement on December 4 that allowing Chinese telecommunications firms such as Huawei and ZTE anywhere in a country's 5G networks would present critical risks to the privacy, human rights, and security of its citizens.
美国敦促包括伙伴和盟友在内的所有国家防止不可信赖的供应商参与其未来5G网络任何部分的建设。
The United States urges all countries, including partners and allies, to adopt national security policies that would prevent untrusted vendors from accessing any part of their future 5G networks.
答：美方动辄将安全挂在嘴边，我很想问一问，安全的标准到底是什么？究竟应该由谁来裁定和判断什么是安全、什么是危险？如果一个人既当运动员又当裁判员，还总是不停地吹黑哨，这个人还值得信任吗？这场比赛还会是公平的比赛吗？
The US keeps talking about security. But I wonder, what are the criteria for security? Who is to decide and judge that? If a person is both the athlete and the referee -- more than often a crooked referee -- in a match, how can this person be trusted and how can this match be fair?
美方的所谓“安全陷阱”乍听很堂皇，实际很荒唐。
The so-called "security trap" cooked up by the US sounds very serious, but actually it is nothing but absurdity.
如果按照美方这种“只要是中国的东西就是危险的”荒谬逻辑，那是不是中国生产的衣服、鞋子美国人也都不能穿，因为这也可能产生安全威胁？
If the US logic stands, everything made in China is dangerous. Then are Americans to stop wearing shoes and clothes made in China, for they, too, may pose a security threat?
我记得不久前看过一个报道，微软公司前首席执行官比尔·盖茨出席一场公开活动时作了一个非常有意思的类比，他认为“只要是中国的东西就是危险的”这种逻辑很荒唐。
Not long ago, former Microsoft CEO Bill Gates made an interesting analogy at an open event to show the absurd logic behind the belief that everything from China is bad.
他表示，中国购买了波音公司大量飞机，波音飞机上有大量美国软件。
He said that China bought Boeing aircraft, and coming with that is a large amount of US software.
如果按照美方某些人的逻辑，中方是不是也应该高度怀疑和警惕美方会发出奇怪的命令，让波音飞机引擎突然熄火？那么中国或者其他国家谁还敢买美国生产的飞机、汽车和其他任何电子产品？
If the US logic stands, shouldn't the Chinese government be vigilant to American directives to shut the engines? Were that true, who dares to buy US-made aircraft, automobiles or any other electronic products?
前天我已经详细介绍了有关情况，包括英国政府、德国联邦信息安全办公室及欧盟委员会等机构经过多年审查都没有发现华为存在明显“后门”。
I made a thorough statement the other day on this issue. After years of review, the British government, German's Federal Office for Information Security and the European Commission all failed to detect any obvious backdoor in Huawei.
相反，根据公开报道，多家美国公司，如思科、苹果公司等都存在安全漏洞，爆出过多起“后门”事件。
However, security loopholes have been spotted in several prominent US companies, including Cisco and Apple, with many backdoor cases revealed.
臭名昭著的“棱镜门”事件表明，在美国强大的全球监控窃听体系面前，即便是美国盟友的领导人和民众也是毫无隐私可言的。
The infamous PRISM program has shown that even leaders and citizens of allies of the US have no privacy in front of its powerful global surveillance and wiretapping system.
华为公司早已公开表明，愿意同有关国家签署无“后门”协议，也愿意接受第三方检测和监督。
Huawei has stated its readiness to sign no-backdoor agreement and to receive third-party test and supervision.
不知道美方能不能作出同样的承诺？
Can the US make the same pledge?
我们希望并相信有关国家会从自身长远利益出发，坚持独立判断，坚持公平、公正、非歧视原则，拿出足够的智慧不掉入美方所谓的“安全陷阱”。
We hope and believe relevant countries will make independent judgment based on their long-term interests and adhere to the principle of justice, fairness and non-discrimination. I'm sure they are wise enough to skip the "security trap" cooked up by the US.
问：据报道，美国12月2日宣布立即恢复对巴西和阿根廷输美的钢铁和铝产品加征关税。
The US announced on December 2 the immediate resumption of tariffs on steel and aluminum imports from Brazil and Argentina.
当日晚间，美国贸易代表办公室发表声明，计划对价值24亿美元的法国进口商品加征最高100%的关税。
The USTR's office issued a statement that night saying it plans to impose up to 100 percent tariffs on French imports worth 2.4 billion US dollars.
另有报道称，美国正在探讨是否就数字税对奥地利、意大利和土耳其进行调查。
Reports also say the US is exploring whether to launch investigations on Austria, Italy and Turkey regarding digital tax.
中方对此有何回应？
I wonder if China has a comment?
答：我注意到，法国、巴西、阿根廷都就此作出了回应。
I have noted that France, Brazil and Argentina have all made responses.
我也注意到，美方“关税机枪”扫射，使得全球金融市场再次动荡不安，欧美股市均创两个月来最大跌幅。
I have also noticed that the US tariff barrage has sent jitters through global financial markets, with European and US stock markets registering their biggest losses in two months.
这再次反映出，单边主义、保护主义、贸易霸凌主义是对正常国际贸易秩序和世界各国的共同威胁，也充分说明各方携手维护多边主义、国际规则和自由贸易体制的重要性和紧迫性。
This is further testimony that the US unilateralism, protectionism and trade bullying practices are a threat to international trade order and to all countries. It also points to the relevance and urgency of joint efforts to safeguard the free trade regime.
问：3日，第74届联合国大会召开全会，审议巴勒斯坦和中东局势。
On 3 December, the 74th Session of the UN General Assembly convened a plenary session to consider the question of Palestine and the situation in the Middle East.
中国常驻联合国代表等多国代表在会上发言介绍对中东问题的看法。
Many representatives including China's permanent representative to the UN made statements on the Middle East issue.
你能否介绍更多情况？
Could you offer more information?
答：中国是巴勒斯坦人民真诚的好朋友、好伙伴和好兄弟，也是巴以和平的坚定支持者。
China is Palestinian people's sincere good friend, partner and brother and a firm supporter for peace between Palestine and Israel.
中方对巴以局势持续动荡深感忧虑，我们主张通过政治谈判全面公正持久解决巴勒斯坦问题，实现巴以两国和平共处、共同发展。
We are deeply concerned about the continuing turmoil and stand for full, just and lasting resolution of the question of Palestine through political negotiation to realize the peaceful coexistence and common development of Palestine and Israel.
我们也一直呼吁有关方保持冷静克制，避免加剧矛盾对抗，重建并积累互信，为重启巴以和谈创造条件。
China calls on all parties to remain calm and exercise restraint to avoid intensifying confrontations and conflicts, and to remain committed to rebuilding and consolidating mutual trust so as to create favorable conditions for the relaunching of peace talks between Palestine and Israel.
我们认为，联合国有关决议、“两国方案”和“土地换和平”原则是公平正义的底线，必须牢牢坚守。
We believe that relevant UN resolutions and principles including the "two-state solution", "land for peace" are bottom lines for fairness and justice that must be adhered to.
中方对巴勒斯坦人民的苦难感同身受，始终在为促进中东和平积极奔走。
China feels deeply for the suffering of the Palestinian people and has been working actively to promote peace in the Middle East.
不久前中方主办中东安全论坛，王毅国务委员兼外长在会上阐释了中东安全问题的中国方案：一要坚持政治解决的正确方向，二要捍卫公平正义的基本原则，三要发挥联合国的关键作用，四要形成地区和国际社会的一致合力。中方的主张得到与会各方的积极响应和欢迎。
At the recent Middle East Security Forum hosted by China, State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi elaborated on a well-received Chinese proposal for the security issues in the Middle East, namely staying committed to the correct direction of a political settlement, defending the basic principles of fairness and justice, leveraging the key role of the United Nations, and forging synergy in the region and the international community.
中国政府中东问题特使翟隽近期也赴地区国家访问，同有关各方密切接触，开展对话协商，寻求兼顾各方利益的解决方案。
Recently, Special Envoy of the Chinese Government on the Middle East Issue Zhai Jun also visited countries in the region in search of a solution accommodating all parties' interests.
我们坚信，正义也许会迟到，但正义终将到来。
We believe that justice may be delayed, but it will come.
中方将继续支持巴勒斯坦人民恢复民族合法权利的正义事业，将继续为捍卫公平正义、维护地区和平稳定不懈努力。
China will continue to firmly support the just cause of the Palestinian people to restore their legitimate national rights, and work tirelessly to safeguard fairness and justice, and maintain regional peace and stability.
问：你能否介绍王毅国务委员访韩成果？有报道称，中韩正在讨论中国领导人明年上半年访韩事宜，你能否证实有关报道内容？
Could you brief us on the outcomes of State Councilor Wang Yi's visit to the ROK? Reports say the two sides are in discussion for Chinese leader's visit in the first half of next year. Can you confirm that?
答：王毅国务委员正在韩国访问。
State Councilor Wang Yi is now on a visit to the ROK.
王毅国委此次访问是中韩之间一次重要的战略沟通。
It is an important strategic communication between our two countries.
昨天，两国外长举行了正式会谈。
The two foreign ministers held talks yesterday.
王毅国务委员强调，当前世界和平稳定面临的最大威胁，就是单边主义破坏现今国际秩序、霸凌行径挑战国际关系准则。
State Councilor Wang Yi emphasized that the biggest threat to world peace and stability today is unilateralism and bullying acts, which undermine the existing international order and challenge the norms governing international relations.
中国始终奉行独立自主的和平外交政策，主张大小国家一律平等，主张国际关系民主化，反对以大欺小，反对恃强凌弱，反对强加于人，反对干涉别国内政。
China always pursues an independent foreign policy of peace, advocates equality between big and small nations, promotes democracy in international relations, opposes the practice of the big and strong bullying the small and weak, the imposition of one's own will on others and interference in other countries' internal affairs.
中国愿同所有负责任国家，包括韩国一道，秉持多边主义理念，坚守公平正义原则，用实际行动维护以联合国为核心的国际体系，维护以国际法为基础的国际秩序，维护以世贸组织为基石的多边贸易体系。
China is willing to work with all responsible countries, including the ROK, to uphold multilateralism and the principle of fairness and justice, maintain the international system with the UN at its core, the international order based on international law, and the multilateral trading system with the WTO as foundation.
双方同意谋划好下阶段重要高层交往，加强两国战略沟通合作，双方商定推进“一带一路”倡议同韩方发展战略规划对接，积极探讨推进第三方合作，积极评价两国启动编制《中韩经贸合作发展规划（2021—2025）》，同意加快推进中韩自贸协定第二阶段谈判进程，打造贸易合作升级版。
The two sides agreed to plan important high-level exchanges in the next stage and strengthen the strategic communication and cooperation between the two countries. They agreed to better synergize the Belt and Road Initiative and the ROK's development strategy and had positive discussion of advancing third-party cooperation. They applauded the launching of the formulation of the development plan 2021-2025 on China-ROK economic and trade cooperation, agreed to accelerate the second-phase negotiation process of the China-ROK free trade agreement, and build an upgraded version of trade cooperation.
双方确定新建中韩海洋事务对话合作机制，商定共同坚持多边主义，维护自由贸易，致力于建设开放型世界经济。
The two sides decided to establish a new bilateral maritime affairs dialogue and cooperation mechanism. Both sides agreed to remain committed to multilateralism, free trade and building an open world economy.
双方积极评价区域全面经济伙伴关系（RCEP）整体结束谈判，愿与有关国家一道，确保协定在明年正式签署。
Both commended the conclusion of the negotiations on Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) and expressed readiness to work with others to ensure the official signing of the deal next year.
此外，双方还同意按照达成的共识，继续妥善处理“萨德”等影响中韩关系健康发展的问题，切实尊重彼此核心利益和正当关切。
The two sides also agreed to follow their consensus to properly handle the THAAD issue that affects the healthy development of China-ROK relations and respect each other's core interests and legitimate concerns.
双方共同回顾了去年以来朝鲜半岛形势的发展变化，同意按照“双轨并进”思路，推进半岛问题政治解决进程。
The two sides looked back on how the situation on the Korean Peninsula evolved since last year and agreed to advance the political settlement of the Peninsula issue in accordance with the dual-track approach.
中方主张，朝美新加坡会晤达成的重要共识应当得到有效落实，朝方在安全和发展方面的合理关切应当得到重视和解决，安理会应当根据形势发展，在启动讨论相关决议可逆条款、缓解对朝制裁方面采取实际行动，以鼓励各方朝着政治解决半岛问题的方向继续前进。
China believes that the important consensus reached at the DPRK-US summit in Singapore should be put into effective implementation. The DPRK's legitimate concerns in security and development should be valued and addressed. The Security Council should take concrete actions to begin discussing invoking relevant resolution provisions to modify and ease sanctions on the DPRK so as to encourage all parties to move forward in the course of political settlement.
至于你关心的高层访问问题，据我了解，双方同意就下阶段高层交往保持密切沟通。
As to the high-level visit you asked about, as I understand, the two sides agreed to stay in close communication on high-level interaction going forward.
如果有消息，我们会及时发布。
We will release information once we have it.
问：我们注意到，美国近来在涉港、涉疆问题上采取针对中国的行动，并表示不急于达成中美经贸协议，导致美股3日全线下跌。
Recently the US has taken actions against China on issues relating to Hong Kong and Xinjiang. It also said there is no rush to reach a trade deal, leading to decline in US stock markets on December 3.
另，美国农会联合会发布报告称，去年9月至今年9月，美国破产农场已经达580家，同比增长24%，美国9个州的农场破产数更是达到了10年来的最高值。
Besides, according to a recent report from the American Farm Bureau Federation (AFBF), 580 farms filed for bankruptcy between September 2018 and September 2019, which is a 24-percent increase from the previous 12-month period. In nine American states, farm bankruptcy filings were the highest in a decade.
该机构主席杜瓦尔表示，磋商时间拖得越久，美国农民就越难以赢回在中国的市场份额。
AFBF President Zippy Duvall said that the longer consultations take, the harder it will be for American farmers to get back market shares in China.
你对此有何回应？
Do you have a response?
答：我们早就说过，打贸易战损人害己，到头来损害的还是美国人民的利益。
We already stated that a trade war harms others and oneself. At the end of the day, American people's interests will be undermined.
在平等和相互尊重的基础上达成互利共赢的协议，才符合中美两国人民的利益，也符合国际社会各方的期待。
Only a mutually-beneficial deal on the basis of equality and mutual respect will serve the interests of the Chinese and American people. It is also what the international community hopes to see.
问：俄罗斯联邦安全会议秘书帕特鲁舍夫目前正在中国，同杨洁篪主任共同主持中俄第十五轮战略安全磋商。
Secretary Patrushev of the Security Council of the Russian Federation is now in China to co-chair the 15th round of China-Russia strategic security consultation with Director Yang Jiechi.
分析人士认为，中俄近期明显加大了战略协作力度。
Analysts say China and Russia have apparently strengthened strategic coordination lately.
你能否进一步介绍有关情况？
I wonder if you could comment on that?
答：当前单边主义和霸凌行径严重冲击和破坏国际秩序。
Unilateralism and bullying practices are having a severe impact on international order.
个别国家甚至粗暴干涉他国内政，损害有关国家的主权、安全和发展利益。
Some country even blatantly interferes in other countries' internal affairs and undermines their sovereignty, security and development interests.
中俄作为联合国安理会常任理事国，作为新时代全面战略协作伙伴，当然要进一步加强战略安全沟通，维护好各自的核心利益和共同安全，为维护世界和地区的安全、和平与稳定履行作为安理会常任理事国应有的责任。
As permanent members of the UN Security Council as well as comprehensive and strategic partners of coordination for a new era, China and Russia will of course enhance communication in strategic security, step up mutual strategic trust, safeguard respective core interests and common security, and play our due role to uphold security, peace, stability and beyond.
12月2日，习近平主席同来访的俄罗斯联邦安全会议秘书帕特鲁舍夫举行了会见。
On December 2, President Xi Jinping met with Secretary Patrushev.
昨天，中共中央政治局委员、中央外事工作委员会办公室杨洁篪主任在上海同帕特鲁舍夫先生共同主持了中俄第十五轮战略安全磋商。
Yesterday in Shanghai, Mr. Patrushev co-chaired the 15th round of China-Russia strategic security consultation with Yang Jiechi, member of the Political Bureau of the Communist Party of China (CPC) Central Committee and Director of the Office of the Foreign Affairs Commission of the CPC Central Committee.
双方围绕新时代中俄关系、国际事务以及在多边框架内的协作等问题深入沟通，达成广泛共识。
Both sides had in-depth exchange and reached broad consensus on China-Russia relations in a new era, international affairs and multilateral coordination.
双方都同意要进一步密切战略协作，坚决反对外部干涉，坚定支持彼此核心利益，维护各自国家的政治和制度安全，同意把维护和践行多边主义作为国际合作的重点方向，继续旗帜鲜明地反对单边主义和霸凌行径，维护国际和地区的和平、安全与稳定。
They agreed to conduct closer strategic coordination, oppose foreign intervention, support each other's core interests and defend domestic political security and security of social system. We will openly reject unilateralism and bullying practices and uphold peace, security and stability.
当前形势下，中俄进一步密切战略沟通，将为维护国际战略安全稳定注入更多正能量。
Under the current circumstances, closer strategic coordination between China and Russia will only bring positive energy to international strategic security and stability.
问：3日，中朝在北京举行了第13轮领事磋商，请问这次磋商中有没有谈到联合国安理会决议规定的遣返朝鲜劳工问题？
China and the DPRK held the 13th round of consular consultation on December 3 in Beijing. Did you discuss the repatriation of DPRK workers as required by UN Security Council resolutions?
目前，还有很多朝鲜劳工在中国工作，中方在这个问题上打算采取什么措施？
As there are still many DPRK workers in China, what measures will you take?
答：我可以告诉你的是，中方一贯认真执行安理会相关决议，履行自身承担的国际义务，我们会按照决议规定处理相关问题。
China has been earnestly implementing relevant Security Council resolutions and fulfilling international obligations. We will deal with the issues in accordance with relevant UNSCR provisions.
2019年12月4日外交部发言人华春莹主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Hua Chunying's Regular Press Conference on December 4, 2019
美国国会众议院刚刚通过了所谓“2019年维吾尔人权政策法案”。
The US House of Representatives just passed the Uyghur Human Rights Policy Act of 2019.
该案蓄意诋毁中国新疆的人权状况，大肆抹黑中国去极端化和打击恐怖主义的努力，恶意攻击中国政府治疆政策，严重违反国际法和国际关系基本准则，严重干涉中国内政。
This bill deliberately smears the human rights condition in Xinjiang, slanders China's efforts in de-radicalization and counter-terrorism and viciously attacks the Chinese government's Xinjiang policy. It seriously violates international law and basic norms governing international relations, and grossly interferes in China's internal affairs.
中方对此表示强烈愤慨、坚决反对。
China is strongly indignant at and firmly opposed to it.
涉疆问题根本不是人权、民族、宗教问题，而是反暴恐和反分裂问题。
Xinjiang-related issues are not about human rights, ethnicity or religion, but about fighting violence, terrorism and separatism.
新疆曾经深受极端主义、暴恐活动之害。
Previously, Xinjiang suffered gravely from extremism, violence and terrorism.
面对严峻形势，新疆自治区政府依法打击暴恐活动，同时重视源头治理，包括积极推进去极端化工作，不断促进经济发展、民族团结和社会和谐稳定。
Faced with severe circumstances, the government of Xinjiang Autonomous Region lawfully fought violent and terrorist crimes while addressing the root causes. Our efforts include advancing de-radicalization, economic growth, ethnic solidarity, social harmony and stability.
这些措施确保了新疆三年来未发生一起恐怖袭击事件，受到2500万新疆各族人民的普遍支持，也为全球反恐事业作出了积极贡献。
Thanks to those efforts, Xinjiang hasn't seen a single terrorist attack over the past three years. Those endeavors are endorsed by all 25 million people of various ethnic groups in Xinjiang. They are also China's contribution to the global counter-terrorism cause.
国际社会对中国政府治疆政策普遍予以积极评价。
The international community speaks highly of China's Xinjiang policy.
2018年底以来，70余批国家和地区官员、国际组织、新闻媒体、宗教团体、专家学者等一千余人参访新疆，他们纷纷称赞新疆反恐、去极端化工作经验值得学习借鉴。
Since the end of 2018, over 1,000 representatives have visited Xinjiang in more than 70 groups, including officials from various countries, regions and international organizations, and people from the press, religious groups and the academic circle. They acclaimed that Xinjiang's experience in counter-terrorism and de-radicalization was worth learning from.
今年3月，伊斯兰合作组织外长理事会通过决议，赞赏中国关怀穆斯林群众所作的努力。
In March this year, the Council of Foreign Ministers of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation adopted a resolution which commended China's efforts in providing care to Muslim citizens.
7月，50余国常驻日内瓦代表联名致函联合国人权理事会主席和人权高专，积极评价中国在反恐和去极端化工作中尊重和保障人权。
In July, ambassadors of over 50 countries to the UN Office at Geneva co-signed a letter to the president of the UN Human Rights Council and the High Commissioner for Human Rights, applauding China's respect and protection of human rights in its counter-terrorism and de-radicalization efforts.
10月，60多个国家在第74届联大三委会议期间踊跃发言，称赞中国新疆巨大的人权进步。
In October, at the Third Committee session of the 74th UNGA, more than 60 countries commended in their statements the tremendous human rights progress achieved in Xinjiang, China.
这些都有力证明，美方拿涉疆问题做文章，完全违背事实，完全违背国际社会主流民意。
All those are strong proof that the US accusations on Xinjiang-related issues are entirely against facts and the mainstream public opinion of the international community.
我们要正告美方，新疆事务纯属中国内政，不容任何外国干涉。
We state our position clearly to the US that as Xinjiang is part of China, its affairs are purely domestic affairs that allow no foreign interference.
美方上述法案蓄意抹黑中方反恐和去极端化举措，只会进一步暴露其在反恐问题上的双重标准，只会让中国人民进一步看清其伪善面目和险恶用心。
This US bill smears our efforts in counter-terrorism and de-radicalization, which only reveals America's double standards on counter-terrorism and further exposes to the Chinese people its hypocrisy and malicious intentions.
中国政府和人民捍卫国家主权、安全、发展利益的决心坚定不移。
The Chinese government and people are determined in safeguarding national sovereignty, security and development interests.
美方利用涉疆问题挑拨中国民族关系、破坏新疆繁荣稳定、遏制中国发展壮大的图谋是绝对不可能得逞的。
Under the pretext of Xinjiang-related issues, the US attempts to sow discord among various ethnic groups in China, undermine prosperity and stability in Xinjiang, and contain China's growth. But its attempt will never succeed.
我们奉劝美方立即纠正错误，阻止上述涉疆法案成法，停止利用涉疆问题干涉中国内政。
We urge the US to correct its mistakes at once, prevent this bill from becoming law, and stop using Xinjiang-related issues to interfere China's internal affairs.
中方将根据形势发展作出进一步反应。
China will take further reactions according to how the situation develops.
问：美国会众院今早讨论通过“2019年维吾尔人权政策法案”。
The US House of Representatives just passed the Uyghur Human Rights Policy Act of 2019 this morning.
美众议员史密斯称，中国政府在新疆大规模拘禁上百万人，进行的镇压活动堪称“现代集中营”。
Representative Chris Smith called China's "mass internment of millions" in Xinjiang and "modern-day concentration camps".
美众议长佩洛西称，中方对待维吾尔人的方式激怒了全世界的集体良知。
House Speaker Nancy Pelosi called China's treatment of Uyghurs "an outrage to the collective conscience of the world".
答：我不知道大家是怎么看待美国那些议员的？我听说很多美国议员甚至没有护照，没有来中国看过，更没有去过新疆，他们怎么能代表14亿中国人民或者是2500万新疆人民？
I don't know what you think of those US lawmakers, but I've heard that some of them don't even have passports. They have never been to China, let alone Xinjiang. How can they speak for the 1.4 billion Chinese people or the 25 million people in Xinjiang?
对新疆状况作出无端指责和完全不符合事实、颠倒黑白的评论，未免也太自以为是、狂妄自大了！
And yet they are making unwarranted allegations and false comments on Xinjiang. How arrogant!
在少数民族问题上，这些美国议员政客跟中方讲“良知”，真是太无知，太无耻，太虚伪了。
US politicians are talking about "conscience" with China on ethnic minorities. What ignorance, what brazenness, what hypocrisy! Have they forgotten?
难道这些美国政客真的忘了吗？！美国200多年发展史本身就是一部印第安人的血泪史。印第安人本是美洲大陆的天然主人。
The two-century long American history is tainted with the blood and tears of native Indians, who were originally master of the continent.
在19世纪的近百年时间里，美国军队通过西进运动大肆驱逐、杀戮印第安人，侵占了印第安人几百万平方公里土地，攫取了无数自然资源。
Starting from the 19th century, the US army occupied millions of square kilometers of land and grabbed countless natural resources by expelling and slaughtering native Indians through the Westward Expansion.
美国政府还对印第安人实行强制同化政策，长期对印第安人进行驱逐、屠戮和迫害，不给予印第安人应有的公民权利。
Apart from that, the US also conducts forced assimilation of native Americans, killing, expelling and persecuting them and denying them their due civil rights.
如今，在美印第安人数量仅占美国总人口的2.09%，处境极为窘迫，印第安人集聚地基础设施极为落后、缺少水电、网络不通，面临失业、贫困、疾病、蜗居等重重困境。
Today, they only account for 2.09 percent of the total US population. They are facing numerous difficulties, including backward infrastructure in reservations, shortage of water and electricity, lack of Internet access, unemployment, poverty, diseases and poor living conditions.
对于这些触目惊心的事实，美方有关议员政客难道真的不知道吗？他们的良知在哪里？
Faced with all these shocking facts, can the US politicians feign ignorance? Where is their conscience?
中国实行民族区域自治制度，坚持各民族平等团结，依法尊重和保护宗教信仰自由，保护正常的宗教活动，维护宗教团体、宗教活动场所和信教公民的合法权益。
China implements the system of ethnic regional autonomy, upholds ethnic equality and unity, respects and protects freedom of religious belief, protects normal religious activities and safeguard religious groups, religious venues, and believers' rights in accordance with law.
新疆各族人民享有平等的法律地位和宪法法律赋予的选举与被选举、参与国家事务管理、宗教信仰自由、接受教育、使用本民族语言文字、继承本民族传统文化等各项权利。
People of all ethnic groups in Xinjiang enjoy equal legal status and constitutional and lawful rights, including right to elect and be elected, to participate in management of state affairs, to use the spoken and written languages of their ethnic groups, to inherit their ethnic culture, as well as freedom of religious belief and right to education, etc.
涉疆问题绝不是什么人权问题，绝不是什么民族问题，绝不是什么宗教问题，而是反分裂和反暴恐的问题。
Xinjiang-related issues are by no means about human rights, ethnicity or religion, but about the fight against separatism and terrorism.
上世纪90年代以来，特别是“9·11”事件之后，“三股势力”在新疆等地制造了数千起暴力恐怖案件，造成大量无辜群众的生命和财产损失。
Since the 1990s, especially after the September 11 attacks, elements of terrorist, separatist and extremist forces launched several thousand terrorist attacks there, causing massive casualties as well as property loss.
特别是震惊世界的新疆“7·5”事件造成197人死亡，1700多人受伤。
In the "July 5" incident alone,197 people were killed and more than 1,700 injured.
新疆在借鉴和吸收国际社会反恐经验的基础上开展教培工作，正是响应联合国《防止暴力极端主义行动计划》。
Borrowing international counter-terrorism experience, China started vocational education and training in Xinjiang, which is a step answering the call of the UN Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism.
我不知道美方那些议员有没有认真读过？也许他们从来就不关心联合国通过了什么决议或行动计划。
I wonder if the US lawmakers have read the document through? Perhaps they never bother about UN resolutions or action plans.
联合国《防止暴力极端主义行动计划》指出，贫困、失业、缺乏就业机会和教育程度低，以及暴力极端主义团体随意歪曲和利用宗教信仰、族裔差异和政治思想体系等是形成暴力极端主义的背景和成因。
As the Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism points out, poverty, unemployment, lack of job opportunities, poor education and the cynical distortion and misuse of religious beliefs, ethnic differences and political ideologies by violent extremist groups, are all backgrounds and motivations of violent extremism.
《行动计划》提出，应为暴力极端主义团体的人提供教育机会、职业培训资源和经济机遇，鼓励他们脱离暴力极端主义团体。
The document also proposes to encourage members of violent extremist groups to leave such groups by providing them with educational and economic opportunities as well as vocational training resources.
为此，世界很多国家设立“去极端化中心”、“教育转化中心”进行去极端化改造。
To this end, many countries have set up deradicalization centers and education transformation centers.
有的国家在监狱和社区两个层面对恐怖分子以及高危群体进行教育转化。
Some countries have developed both in-prison and community-based education transformation of terrorists and high-vulnerability groups.
也有国家，就像昨天我提到的，比如英国，通过“转化和脱离”项目，要求涉恐人员参加培训，并且设立隔离中心，防止有关极端暴恐思想在监狱传播。
In the UK, the Desistance and Disengagement Programme (DDP) makes it mandatory for all terrorism-related offenders to receive training. There are also segregation units in prison to prevent the spread of radical violent terrorism.
实践证明，中国新疆所采取的措施，恰恰是对联合国有关行动计划的积极响应和有益的探索和实践。
As has been proven, the measures taken in Xinjiang are useful exploration of the UN action plan.
大家都知道，目前新疆安全形势明显好转，连续三年没有出现恐怖袭击。
The security situation there has significantly improved, with not a single terror attack for three years.
中方采取的预防性反恐和去极端化努力，得到了新疆各族人民的拥护和支持，也得到了国际社会的普遍支持和积极评价。
The preventive counter-terrorism and deradicalization efforts have not only gained the support of all ethnic groups in Xinjiang, but also received international recognition.
中方为了反暴恐和去极端化所做的努力和取得的成效，值得美方赞赏和学习借鉴，而不是抹黑。
The US should also recognize and learn from China's effective measures instead of discrediting them.
美方对自己迫害屠戮印第安人的残酷行为选择性遗忘，对印第安人的血泪历史和悲惨现实视而不见，却对中国成功的少数民族政策，特别是涉疆政策进行毫无底线的污蔑抹黑，妄图利用涉疆问题挑拨中国的民族关系、破坏新疆繁荣稳定、阻遏中国发展壮大，这只能进一步暴露出美方在反恐问题上的双重标准，只会让世人进一步看清美方的伪善面目和险恶用心。
The US is being selectively forgetful of its brutality towards the American Indians and turning a blind eye to their past pain and present misery. However, it is slandering China's successful ethnic policy, in particular our Xinjiang policy, in an attempt to sow discord in ethnic relations, undermine Xinjiang's prosperity and stability, and contain China's development. This only further exposes to the world the US' double standards on counter-terrorism, its hypocrisy and malicious intentions.
说到底，新疆的状况怎么样，只有新疆2500万各族人民群众最有发言权，只有14亿中国人民最有发言权。
After all, the 25 million people in Xinjiang and the 1.4 billion Chinese people are in the best position to say how the situation in Xinjiang is.
那些美国议员连美国全体人民的利益都代表不了，如何能代表中国人民和中国新疆人民？他们凭什么对我们品头论足？
The US lawmakers cannot even represent the interests of all American people. How can they speak for the Chinese people or the people in Xinjiang? What makes them think they can judge us?
近年来，美方打着人权和反恐的旗号，在阿富汗、伊拉克、叙利亚等地到处燃起战火、发动战争，导致数百万无辜民众伤亡，大量难民流离失所。
In recent years, the US used human rights and counter-terrorism as a cover to wage wars in Afghanistan, Iraq and Syria, killing millions of innocent civilians and turning more into displaced refugees.
美方这种完全蔑视其他国家人民生命和发展权利的行为才真正激怒了全世界有良心的人的良知和愤怒！必须指出，恐怖主义、极端主义是人类社会的共同敌人，反恐、去极端化是国际社会的共同责任。
Such acts in total contempt of people's right to life and development are a real "outrage to the collective conscience of the world"! Terrorism and extremism are common enemies of human beings. Counter-terrorism and deradicalization is the shared responsibility of the international community.
“9·11”事件殷鉴不远，美方不要好了伤疤忘了痛。
It hasn't been long since the September 11 attacks. The US should not forget the pain as wounds heal.
如果美方在反恐问题上继续玩弄双重标准，甚至妄图以此侵害别国的主权和安全，最后只会自食其果，损害美国自身的利益。
If it continues to play with double standards or even infringe upon other countries' sovereignty and security, it will end up swallowing a bitter fruit with its own interests harmed.
我刚听说今天美联社等几家外国媒体在直播。
I just heard AP and others are broadcasting this press conference live.
我想拜托你们，向普通的美国民众传递一个信息。
I would like to ask a favor. Please convey to the American people this message.
你们知道中国的普通人是如何看待美国议会刚刚通过的这个愚蠢的法案吗？他们是这么看的：美国把阿富汗搞乱了，把伊拉克搞乱了，把叙利亚搞乱了，把也门也搞乱了，现在他们又想来搞乱中国的新疆和香港。
Do you know what ordinary Chinese people think of this stupid bill the US Congress just passed? This is what they say: the US messed up Afghanistan, then Iraq, then Syria, then Yemen. Now it is trying to mess up China's Xinjiang and Hong Kong.
这只是他们的一厢情愿和痴心妄想，绝对不可能得逞！
This is only wishful thinking and a pipe dream. It will never succeed.
我希望你们把中国人民发自内心的强烈呼声传递给美国普通民众。谢谢！
I do hope you will let the American people hear the Chinese people's voice. It would be much appreciated.
问：特朗普总统昨天说，他不介意将达成经贸协议的时间推迟到明年大选之后。
Following up on this Xinjiang-related bill. We've seen that President Trump said yesterday that he would not mind delaying a trade deal with China until after the election next year.
上周，他签署了“香港人权与民主法案”。
Also we saw that last week, he signed into law the Hong Kong Human Rights and Democracy Act.
这周，美国会众院又通过了“2019年维吾尔人权政策法案”。
And then this week there's this movement on this Xinjiang-related act.
中方是否认为美国政府将经贸和人权问题相挂钩？
From China's perspective, do you think there is connection between the US government's trade and human rights policies?
答：美方怎么想的、打算怎么做，你应该去问美方。
If you want to know what the US is thinking and planning to do, you should ask US officials.
对我们来说，中国的政策从来都是一贯的、明确的、说到做到的。
What I can say for China is that our position is consistent and clear, and we always honor our word.
对于经贸问题，我们的立场一以贯之。我们主张并且相信，只有本着平等和相互尊重的精神达成一个互利共赢、双方都能接受的协议才是可持久的，才是符合两国人民共同利益的。
On the trade issue, we hold that only a mutually-beneficial agreement acceptable to both reached on the basis of equality and mutual respect will last and serve the interests of the two peoples.
对于涉港和涉疆问题，我们已经多次表明了中国政府的严正立场。
With regard to Hong Kong and Xinjiang, we have also stated the Chinese government's solemn position repeatedly.
任何人都不要低估中国政府捍卫国家主权、安全、发展利益的决心和能力。
No one should underestimate the Chinese government's resolve and ability to safeguard national sovereignty, security and development interests.
你提到的这些问题，我也注意到，不要说中国的媒体，就连美国的媒体对此都有很多评论，也出了很多主意。
Your question brings to my mind many media comments and suggestions.
我感觉大家对于美方现在的做法都已经看不下去了，都希望、呼吁中方采取更严厉的行动予以坚决反制。
It feels like people can no longer sit and watch what the US is doing, and so are calling on us to take stronger measures in response.
对于这一点，请你们放心，我刚才已经说了，中国政府有决心、也完全有能力捍卫好我们的主权、安全、发展利益。
Please rest assured. As I just said, the Chinese government has the resolve and ability to safeguard national sovereignty, security and development interests.
任何人想借涉港问题、涉疆问题来干涉、牵制中国的发展壮大，真的只能是痴心妄想。
Attempts to contain China with Hong Kong or Xinjiang issues will prove to be nothing but day-dreaming.
问：美国会众院通过“2019年维吾尔人权政策法案”是否会影响第一阶段中美经贸协议的达成？
Will the passage of this bill from the US House of Representatives have any impact on the phase one trade deal and its timeline?
答：如果美方采取损害中方利益的行为，必须要付出应有的代价。
If the US takes measures that harm China's interests, it must pay the price.
这对中美关系以及两国在重要领域的合作不可能不产生影响。
Besides, there is no way this won't affect bilateral relations and cooperation in important areas.
问：你能否进一步说明“付出应有的代价”具体指什么？美方哪些领域会受到影响？昨天，《环球时报》主编发推特称，由于美国会拟通过“2019年维吾尔人权政策法案”，中国正考虑对在涉疆问题上表现恶劣的美国官员实施签证限制，可能禁止持外交护照的美国人进入新疆。
Could you expand a little on what you mean that the US will pay the price and what areas will be affected? Yesterday Global Times' editor-in-chief tweeted about China considering imposing visa restrictions on US officials with odious performance on Xinjiang and maybe banning US diplomatic passport holders from entering Xinjiang.
现在法案已获通过，你能否提供进一步的评论？
Now that the bill is passed, would you be able to provide more information?
答：我刚才说了，我们注意到连日来，中国媒体和美国媒体都有很多猜测解读。
As I just said, we note the numerous speculation and interpretation in Chinese and US media.
很多人都看不下去美方的霸权行径——完全是无理、强盗、不可理喻、错误、愚蠢的行为，也都纷纷给我们出主意。
Many people just cannot sit and watch the US hegemonic acts, which are unreasonable, wrong and foolish. They have also offered suggestions.
我们感谢他们的关心。
We appreciate that.
也请他们放心，中国政府完全有能力捍卫好我们的主权、安全、发展利益。
Please rest assured. The Chinese government is fully capable of safeguarding national sovereignty, security and development interests.
至于要采取什么样的行动，大家请不要着急，该付出的代价终究会来的。
As to what actions will be taken, please stay tuned as the price will be paid eventually.
问：据报道，有美国领导人近日称，中国已非常强大，这很大程度上是利用美国的钱做到的。
According to reports, US leader said China has become very powerful largely with US money.
答：这个说法太可笑了！
How ridiculous!
环顾全球，这个世界上有哪个国家有能力用钱来重建一个中国？太可笑了！
Is any country on earth capable of rebuilding China with money? Isn't it absurd?
中国发展的成就可不是从天上掉下来的，也不是靠什么人、什么国家恩赐施舍的，而是全体中国人民用自己的勤劳、汗水、智慧和勇气干出来的。
China's achievement is neither a windfall nor made with others' alms-giving and charity, but earned by the Chinese people with diligence, wisdom and courage.
这一点如果有人还没有看清楚，我只能说真是太缺乏教育了。
If anyone fails to see this point, I shall say they indeed need more education.
我想指出的是，自从1987年中国有外资统计以来，中国累计实际使用外资2万多亿美元，其中美国对华投资800多亿美元，仅占中国吸引外国投资的4%左右，仅仅是这个比例而已。
I want to point out that since 1987 when China started keeping statistics on foreign investment, the country has accumulatively utilized foreign investment of more than 2 trillion US dollars. Investment from the United States was over 80 billion US dollars, accounting for only around 4 percent.
但是我们都知道美国从中美合作当中获得了多大的收益。有多少美国家庭因为中国商品而大幅降低了生活成本？美国企业更是获得了丰厚利润。
But the US has gained huge profits from its cooperation with China, with so many American households' living costs largely lowered thanks to Chinese goods and so many businesses gaining lucrative profits.
97%的美国受访企业表示跟中国做生意是盈利的。
Of all surveyed US companies, 97 percent say they have made profits doing business with China.
根据美中贸易全国委员会的报告，仅仅美国对华出口一项就支撑了超过110万个美国就业岗位。
According to a report by the US-China Business Council, US exports to China alone support over 1.1 million jobs in the US.
而在2017年，通用集团在全球亏损110亿元人民币的情况下，从其在中国的两家合资企业拿走的利润将近134亿元！而高通在华销售额占到了总营业收入的58%。
In 2017, General Motors lost 11 billion RMB in global markets but gained nearly 13.4 billion RMB in profits from two joint ventures in China. Qualcomm's sales in China accounted for 58 percent of its global revenue.
也就是说中国养活了、养肥了多少美国企业？！这笔账，我希望他们好好算一算。
How many American businesses China has fed and fattened up! Just do the math.
问：据报道，萨尔瓦多总统布克尔正在中国进行国事访问，你还有什么其他信息可以介绍？
It is reported that El Salvador's President Bukele is on a state visit in China. Can you give more information?
答：应习近平主席邀请，萨尔瓦多总统布克尔12月1日至6日对中国进行国事访问。
At the invitation of President Xi Jinping, El Salvador's President Bukele is paying a state visit to China from December 1 to 6.
昨天，习近平主席同布克尔总统进行了非常富有成果的会谈。
Yesterday, President Xi Jinping held fruitful talks with President Bukele.
两国元首共同见证签署了在经济技术合作、农业、贸易、投资、旅游、体育等领域的多份合作协议。双方还发表了联合声明。
The two sides released a joint statement. The two presidents witnessed the signing of cooperation agreements in science and technology, agriculture, trade, investment, tourism, sports, etc.
中萨建立和发展外交关系，开启了中萨合作的大门。
By establishing and developing diplomatic relations, China and El Salvador opened the door of cooperation.
这次布克尔总统访华无疑对中萨关系具有里程碑意义，使中萨关系站到了一个新的历史起点，必将迎来更加光明的未来。
President Bukele's visit to China is monumental in our bilateral relationship as it elevates the relationship to a new historical starting point and gives it a brighter prospect.
中萨建交一年多来各领域交流合作的进展也证明，中萨建交符合两国人民的根本利益。
Progress in our exchange and cooperation in the past year or so has also proven that the establishment of diplomatic ties serves the fundamental interests of both peoples.
正如布克尔总统指出，中萨建交时间虽然不长，但是潜力巨大，双方完全有能力成为彼此的好朋友和好伙伴。
As President Bukele pointed out, it hasn't been long since we established diplomatic ties, but we have great potentials and we are fully capable of becoming good friends and partners.
他相信同中国这样伟大的国家和真诚的朋友发展关系，将给萨国家的发展带来机遇，给人民带来实实在在的福祉。
He believes that developing relations with China, a great nation and a sincere friend, will bring development opportunities to El Salvador and tangible benefits to its people.
萨方致力于发展长期对华友好关系。
El Salvador is committed to developing long-term, friendly relations with China.
萨方重申将完全恪守一个中国原则，支持中国实现和平统一。
The Salvadorean side reiterated that it fully observes the one-China principle and supports China's peaceful reunification.
布克尔总统这次访华期间双方签署了多项双边合作协议，将为双方未来合作拓展更加广阔的领域，带来互利共赢的成果。
The bilateral cooperation agreements signed during President Bukele's visit will break new ground for mutually beneficial cooperation in the future.
我们期待同萨方加强交往，进一步扩大双方在各领域合作，特别欢迎更多萨尔瓦多各界朋友来中国看看。
China looks forward to closer ties with El Salvador and broader cooperation. Specifically, we welcome more Salvadorean friends from various sectors to visit China.
中萨建交以来，有一些萨尔瓦多的朋友来中国访问。
Some friends from El Salvador visited China after our two countries established diplomatic relations.
他们之前对中国很不了解，说来之前觉得中国是个谜，来了以后他们自己成了中国迷。
They viewed China as a mystery before they came but were fascinated after they arrived.
我相信这说出了很多外国朋友同中国交往的共同感觉。
I believe a lot of foreign friends share the same feeling.
中国这么大，如果不亲自来中国走一走、看一看，仅凭个别西方媒体一些片面报道，真的很难了解真实的中国。
China is a big country. You will not get to know the real China if you don't set foot on this land and only read biased reports by some Western media.
到了中国一看才发现，原来今天的中国是如此的现代，如此的开放，如此的进步，如此的友善，跟个别西方媒体报道的完全不一样。
Only when you are actually here will you see how modern, open and friendly China is, which is totally different from certain Western media's description.
从这个意义上讲，加强人民之间的交往是非常重要的。
In this sense, it is very important to step up people-to-people exchange.
昨天，中国领导人在会谈中表达了欢迎更多萨尔瓦多各界朋友来中国走一走、看一看的邀请和愿望。
In yesterday's talks, the Chinese leader extended an invitation to Salvadoreans, welcoming them to visit China and see the country with their own eyes.
我们相信，随着两国人民日益走近，交往、相互信任增多，中萨关系会有更加广泛、坚实的社会和民意基础，中萨关系将得到长期健康稳定的发展。
As our two peoples share closer ties and greater mutual trust, I believe the people foundation for our relationship will be even more solid. Our relations will grow in a long-term, sound and stable manner.
问：特朗普总统说，并不介意等到明年美国大选后再签署美中贸易协议。
President Trump said he doesn't mind signing a U.S.-China trade deal after next year's election.
请问中方对此有何评论？如何评价目前中美贸易磋商进程及气氛？
What is China's comment on this? How do you see the current China-US trade consultation process and atmosphere?
答：大家可以一起来回忆一下，自从去年3月中美贸易摩擦发生以来，中方有没有讲过什么时候达成协议？没有吧。
Let's recall what happened since the trade friction began in March last year. Has China ever said when to reach an agreement throughout the process? No.
不断对外放风“要达成协议了”、“没有达成协议”、“希望什么时候达成协议”，或者“我想达成协议”、“我不想达成协议”，这些全是美方说的话。
It is the US that keeps saying such things as "close to an agreement", "no agreement concluded", "when the agreement is expected to be reached", or "we want an agreement", "we don't want an agreement", etc.
中方没有说过，对不对？
But China didn't say anything like that, did we?
中方在经贸问题上的立场是一贯的、明确的，而且是非常清晰、有高度共识的。
China's position on the economic and trade issues is consistent, clear and highly consensual.
我们相信，打贸易战不符合任何一方利益。
We believe that it is not in the interests of either side to fight a trade war.
在全球化背景下，中美利益交融如此深厚，中美合作对世界经济复苏增长至关重要。
In the context of globalization, the interests of China and the US are so deeply intertwined, China-US cooperation is critical to the world economic recovery and growth.
不仅是中美两国人民，一些国际金融组织和全世界都希望中美能够通过磋商达成一个互利共赢的协议，能够为世界经济复苏增长作出贡献，这符合两国人民的愿望和期待。
Not only the Chinese and American people, but also some international financial organizations and the rest of the world hope the two countries can contribute to the recovery and growth of world economy by negotiating a mutually beneficial and win-win agreement, which is in line with the aspirations and expectations of the two peoples.
但是，如果正常正当的愿望不能得到满足，如果面临单边主义、保护主义和贸易霸凌主义的欺压，我们别无选择，必须要采取坚决果断的措施捍卫我们正当合法的权益。
However, if such legitimate aspirations are not met, and if we face the pressures of unilateralism, protectionism and trade bullying, we have no choice but to take decisive measures to defend our legitimate rights and interests.
中方这一立场始终是非常明确的。
China's position has always been very clear.
我们不会为达成或不达成协议设定时间期限。
We do not set a deadline for reaching an agreement or not.
我们的态度一贯而明确，磋商必须基于平等和相互尊重，结果必须是互利共赢、为双方所接受的。
Our attitude has always been clear, that is, consultations must be based on equality and mutual respect, and that the outcome must be mutually beneficial and acceptable to both sides.
我们希望美方有些人能够更多地去倾听人民的呼声。
We hope that some people in the US will earnestly heed the call of its people.
问：你能否提供制裁美国非政府组织的更多细节？是否会限制资金流入这些组织？或限制这些组织进入中国大陆？
Can the Foreign Ministry share any details on the NGO sanctions? For example, will they restrict cash flow to those organizations or their access to China's mainland?
答：看来你们很着急，都觉得这些组织作恶多端、欠揍，是不是？板子打在谁身上，谁会觉得疼的。
You all believe these egregious organizations deserve to be punished, right? The sanctioned will feel the pain.
不用着急。
No rush.
问：这些制裁措施是否已经生效？如果没有，何时会生效？
Just a follow-up on the sanctions. Are they already in effect? And if they are not, when will they start?
答：我刚才已经回答了这个问题。不用着急。
I just answered a similar question.
你如果实在看不下去，也请先忍一忍，好吗？
I know you can hardly stand it anymore, but have a little bit more patience, OK?
问：关于新疆人权法案的问题，你刚才说了，中方将根据形势发展作出进一步反应。
On the Uyghur Human Rights Policy Act of 2019, you said China will take further reactions in response to how the situation evolves.
如果这个法案正式签署成法的话，中方是否将采取反制或报复措施？
If this bill is signed into law, will China take countermeasures or retaliation?
答：种瓜得瓜，种豆得豆。
As a Chinese saying goes, you will reap what you sow.
如果美方采取损害中方利益的措施，当然必须要受到还击。
If the US does anything to harm China's interests, there will surely be countermeasures.
2019年12月3日外交部发言人华春莹主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Hua Chunying's Regular Press Conference on December 3, 2019
问：美国务卿蓬佩奥近日在美Politico网站发文称，欧洲国家不能将关键基础设施的控制权交给华为、中兴等中国企业。华为与中国人民解放军存在关联，涉嫌在一些国家从事间谍活动，窃取德国、以色列、英国等国的知识产权。
In an article carried by Politico, US Secretary of State Pompeo wrote that "it's critical that European countries not give control of their critical infrastructure to Chinese tech giants like Huawei, or ZTE", that Huawei "maintains links to the Chinese People's Liberation Army", is "implicated in espionage" in some countries and has "allegedly stolen intellectual property" from countries including Germany, Israel and the United Kingdom.
中国《国家情报法》明确规定中国共产党可迫使总部设在中国的任何5G供应商秘密移交数据。
Pompeo also claims that China's National Intelligence Law makes clear that the Communist Party of China can force any 5G supplier headquartered in China to turn over data in secret.
请问中方对此有何回应？
Do you have a response?
答：中国现代著名作家鲁迅有一篇小说《祝福》，里面有一个人物叫祥林嫂。她总是喋喋不休唠叨着同样的话题。
In New Year's Sacrifice, a short story written by a famous Chinese writer Lu Xun, there is a figure known as Wife of Xianglin who keeps telling the same story time and again.
我看蓬佩奥先生现在的行为举止非常像祥林嫂！只不过祥林嫂唠叨的是一些无害的废话，而蓬佩奥先生唠叨的都是有毒的谎言。
Mr. Pompeo is behaving just like her. But unlike her harmless monologue, Mr. Pompeo keeps repeating poisonous lies.
蓬佩奥先生称，华为涉嫌窃取德国、以色列、英国等国知识产权。
He wrote that Huawei has "allegedly stolen intellectual property" from countries including Germany, Israel and the United Kingdom.
但我们问了无数次，美方无数次回避这个问题，因为美方根本拿不出答案。
We have been asking about this and the US has been shunning the question because it doesn't have the answer.
迄今为止，没有任何一个国家、任何一个公司和任何一个人能够拿出确凿的证据证明华为对他们构成安全威胁。
So far, not a single country, company or individual can present conclusive evidence to prove that Huawei poses a security threat.
相反，我看到今年5月德国《每日镜报》报道称，经过多年审查，英国政府、德国联邦信息安全办公室及欧盟委员会等机构都没有发现华为存在明显“后门”。
On the contrary, Der Tagesspiegel stated in May that after years of review, the UK government, Germany's Federal Office for Information Security and the European Commission all failed to find any backdoor in Huawei.
我们再来看看美国，一个公开事实是：“9·11”之后，美国出台的《爱国者法案》要求网络公司定期提供用户信息。
Now if we look at the US, an open fact is that the Patriot Act passed after the September 11 terror attack requires cyber companies to provide user information regularly.
美国思科设备存在安全漏洞，已经爆出很多起“后门”事件。
Security loopholes, however, have been detected in US company Cisco's equipment, with many backdoor cases revealed.
苹果公司早在2014年就承认可通过苹果手机系统“后门”提取手机用户的短信、通讯录和照片等个人数据。
Back in 2014, Apple admitted in a statement that it could access users' personal data such as text messages, contacts and photos via iPhone backdoor.
去年，“脸书”公司也被曝出用户帐号有“后门”。
In 2018, Facebook's backdoor was exposed.
根据“棱镜门”事件曝光的情况，在美国情报部门，也就是蓬佩奥先生曾经任职的这一部门前，美国人的通话、通信、文件、语音等数据没有个人隐私可言。
According to PRISM revelations, US citizens have no privacy at all, from their telephone calls, correspondence, files to voice data, in front of US intelligence agencies.
另外，有35个国家，包括美国曾经一度特别亲密的盟友国家领导人的通话也都遭到了美国长期窃听，前几天德国的一位部长也提到了这件事情。
The long-term surveillance program also covered telephone calls of leaders of 35 foreign countries, including closest allies of the US. The German Economy Minister also talked about this a few days ago.
而协助实施这些窃听、监控的，根据公开报道来看，正是美国的思科和苹果等公司。
And those who helped carrying out the program are, as revealed by reports available to the public, US businesses such as Cisco and Apple.
蓬佩奥称，中国《国家情报法》明确规定中国共产党可迫使总部设在中国的任何5G供应商秘密移交数据。
Pompeo claims that China's National Intelligence Law makes clear that the CPC can force any 5G supplier headquartered in China to turn over data in secret.
我看到这个报道以后很好奇，想请问蓬佩奥先生，从中国《国家情报法》哪一条哪一款看到这样的规定？大家可以上网查一查，哪里有？
I wonder if he is able to locate this provision? You may look it up online.
事实是，中国《国家情报法》不仅规定了组织和公民依法支持、协助和配合国家情报工作的义务，同时也规定了国家情报工作应当依法进行、尊重和保障人权、维护个人和组织合法权益的义务。
This law stipulates that "an organization or citizen shall support, assist in and cooperate in national intelligence work in accordance with the law and keep confidential the national intelligence work that it or he knows". But it also provides that "national intelligence work shall be conducted in accordance with the law, respect and safeguard human rights, and protect the lawful rights and interests of individuals and organizations".
中国从来没有也不会要求企业或个人以违反当地法律的方式、通过安装“后门”等形式为中国政府采集或提供位于外国境内的数据、信息和情报。
China has never asked and will never ask any company or individual to break local laws and install backdoors to gather data, information or intelligence stored in foreign countries for the Chinese government or to provide it with such information.
中方已经多次申明了这一点。
We have repeatedly stated this point.
他们装睡不爱听，我们也没有办法。
However, certain people just pretend to be asleep and won't listen. There is nothing we can do.
大家都知道，蓬佩奥先生曾在今年4月一场公开演讲上宣称，“我们撒谎、我们欺骗、我们偷窃，这是美国不断探索前进的荣耀”。
Perhaps you still remember that Mr. Pompeo said in an open speech in April "we lied, we cheated, we stole" and it's the "glory of the American experiment".
大家想想看，对于这样一个对撒谎、欺骗、偷窃不以为耻、反以为荣的人，我们这些“三观”正常的人还有什么话可以说呢？没有办法对话了。
What can we, as people with decent values, say to someone who is proud rather than ashamed of lying, cheating and stealing? Dialogue is impossible.
如果让我作一点回应的话，那就一句话：拿出证据来。
My response is just one word, evidence.
问：据报道，美国国务卿蓬佩奥在肯塔基州路易斯维尔大学称，《中英联合声明》是一份在联合国登记、经过批准的“条约”，我们希望确保这些承诺不是“空头支票”。
US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said in Louisville University, Kentucky, that the Sino-British Joint Statement is a ratified treaty that sits at the United Nations. We hope to make sure that those weren't "empty promises".
美要求中方寻求尊重“一国两制”政策的解决方案。
The US asks the Chinese side to find a resolution that honors the "one country, two systems" policy.
答：我不知道蓬佩奥先生有没有读过《中英联合声明》？他知道《联合声明》有多少款、有哪些具体内容吗？他知不知道《联合声明》的核心内容是规定中国对香港恢复行使主权，英国将香港交还给中国。
I wonder if he has read the Sino-British Joint Declaration? Does he know all the provisions? Is he aware of the core content, namely, for China to resume the exercise of sovereignty over Hong Kong and for the UK to restore Hong Kong to China.
《联合声明》中对香港基本方针政策及具体说明是中方单方面政策宣示，纯属中国内政，不是双方协议内容。
The statement and detailed elaboration of China's basic policies regarding Hong Kong is China's policy statement, which is an internal affair, not part of a bilateral agreement.
在香港实施“一国两制”的法律基础是中国宪法和基本法，而非基于《联合声明》。
The legal basis for the "one country, two systems" policy in Hong Kong is China's Constitution and the Basic Law, not the Joint Declaration.
更何况《联合声明》与美国有任何关系吗？
Then again, what on earth does the declaration have to do with the US?
英国对香港进行殖民统治期间，香港有何民主自由可言？不信可以问问“末代港督”彭定康先生。
Was there any democracy during British colonial rule in Hong Kong? Perhaps we can ask the last British governor in Hong Kong Christopher Francis Patten.
那个时候港人有上街游行的自由吗？没有。
Did people in Hong Kong have the right to take to the streets?
当时的立法机关香港立法局有任何一个议员是由港人提名的吗？没有。
No. Was any member of the then legislative council nominated by the people of Hong Kong? No.
港人长期不能享有平等的公民权和参政权。
The people were denied equal civil rights and political participation.
恰恰是香港回归后，中国政府依照宪法和基本法，切实贯彻落实“一国两制”、“港人治港”、高度自治方针，保障香港居民依法享有前所未有的民主权利和自由。
It is only after the return that Hong Kong residents started enjoying unprecedented democratic rights and freedoms as the Chinese government implements the "one country, two systems" policy and ensures that the people of Hong Kong govern Hong Kong with a high degree of autonomy according to the Constitution and the Basic Law.
美方通过“国家民主基金会”在世界各地推进所谓民主运动，但我很好奇的是，美国在世界各地大肆推广所谓的民主、自由和人权，但偏偏对自己国内存在的民主、自由和人权问题视而不见。
The US propels the so-called "democratic movement" all over the world through the NED. I'm curious, as the US spreads the so-called democracy, freedom and human rights in other places, why is it turning a blind eye to issues on democracy, freedom and human rights at home?
难道蓬佩奥先生真的不知道自己国内存在什么样的问题吗？
Is Mr. Pompeo truly unaware of such problems?
我看到一个数字，截至今年8月，美国共发生枪击案34916起，因枪击案死亡9214人；大家也都知道，美国在美墨边境大建边境墙，成千上万的难民被迫骨肉分离，数万名儿童被关押在肮脏狭小的房间，甚至接连死亡；美国还是发达工业国家中唯一没有带薪产假法律的国家，是发达经济体中唯一不保障工人任何休假的国家。
Here are some numbers I saw. Till August this year, there have been 34,916 shootings in the US that killed 9,214 people. And there is the border wall with Mexico, forced separation between refugees and their families, tens of thousands of children held in dirty narrow rooms, and sometimes one death after another. The US is also the only developed country without law on paid maternity leave and the only advanced economy that doesn't guarantee workers' leave.
一些美国官员和议员拿着纳税人的血汗钱，却偏偏只关心一小撮香港极端暴力分子反中乱港的所谓“自由”，对自己国内存在的严重的民主、自由和人权问题漠不关心。
Some US officials and lawmakers are spending taxpayers' hard-earned money on advancing the so-called "freedom" of a handful of anti-China extremists disrupting Hong Kong while neglecting serious issues with democracy, freedom and human rights at home.
难道美国人民就不需要民主、自由和人权吗？美方政客应该更多关心一下自己国内的事情。
Don't the American people need democracy, freedom and human rights? US politicians should mind their own affairs more.
问：昨天，联合国气候变化大会第25届会议在西班牙马德里开幕，来自196个国家的2.9万人参会。会议的一个重要目标是完成与《巴黎协定》实施细则相关的谈判。
The 25th UN Climate Change Conference (COP25) was opened in Madrid, Spain, and over 29,000 participants from 196 countries attended the meeting, which is designed to finish the negotiations on the guidelines on the implementation of the Paris Agreement.
中方在应对气候变化问题上将作出怎样的努力？
How will China play its part in addressing climate change?
答：中方在应对气候变化问题上所做的努力是巨大的，作出的贡献也是重大的。
China has made enormous efforts in and important contributions to addressing climate change, a common challenge facing all human beings.
我们认为气候变化是全人类面临的共同挑战，应对气候变化必须坚持多边主义、加强国际合作。
To address it, we must stick to multilateralism and international cooperation.
气候变化马德里会议是一次承上启下的重要会议。
The COP 25 in Madrid is an important meeting.
国际社会应根据《联合国气候变化框架公约》和《巴黎协定》确定的公平、共同但有区别的责任和各自能力原则，推动《巴黎协定》全面有效落实，促进绿色、低碳和可持续发展。
The international community needs to follow the principles of fairness, common yet differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities, work for full and effective implementation of the Paris Agreement, and pursue green, low-carbon and sustainable development.
我们愿与各方携手，全力支持马德里会议取得成功。
China would like to work with all parties for the success of the COP 25 in Madrid.
中国贯彻创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享的新发展理念，采取积极措施应对气候变化，坚定落实《巴黎协定》，履行对外承诺，坚定走绿色可持续发展道路，努力建设生态文明。
China embraces a new development philosophy featuring high-quality development that is innovative, coordinated, green and open for the benefit of all. We actively take measures on addressing climate change. We are committed to implementing the Paris Agreement, fulfilling our promises to the world and sticking to green and sustainable development for a better environment.
在这方面，中国政府付出了艰苦卓绝的努力。
We have done a lot of hard work to this end.
今年11月27日，中方发布了《中国应对气候变化的政策与行动2019年度报告》。
On November 27 this year, we issued an annual report on China's policies and actions for addressing climate change.
去年，中国单位GDP二氧化碳排放比2005年下降45.8%，相当于减少二氧化碳排放52.6亿吨；非化石能源占能源消费比重达到14.3%。
In 2018, China's carbon dioxide emissions per unit of GDP dropped by 45.8% compared to that in 2005, which equals the amount of 5.26 billion tons of carbon dioxide. Our consumption of non-fossil fuel in total energy consumption was 14.3%.
中国是对可再生能源投资最多的国家，可再生能源装机占全球的30%，在全球增量中占比44%，新能源汽车保有量占全球一半以上，中国为应对全球气候变化作出了重大贡献。
China's investment in renewable energy is larger than any other country with 30% of world's total installed renewable energy capacity. In the same category, our increase is 44% of that in the world. We have more than half of the world's electric cars. All those are our contributions to climate change.
同时，作为发展中国家，中国发展不平衡、不充分问题仍然突出，同发达国家相比仍有不小差距。
As a developing country, China still has domestic problems such as unbalanced development and uneven income distribution. There is still a development gap between China and developed countries.
在面临改善民生等艰巨任务的同时，我们依然没有放弃同全球各国一道应对气候变化的努力。
While facing with difficult tasks such as improving people's lives, China is actively fulfilling international responsibilities that are consistent with our development stage and domestic conditions.
我们将继续沿着既定的政策和目标走下去，积极承担符合自身发展阶段和国情的国际责任，切实实施应对气候变化政策行动，为全球生态文明建设贡献力量。
We are fulfilling our set goals, acting on policies to deal with climate change and contributing to global ecological environment.
问：据报道，美国国会众议院议长佩洛西昨天在马德里出席联合国气候变化大会期间称，美方代表团与会旨在表明美国国会对采取行动应对气候危机的承诺坚如磐石。
US House Speaker Pelosi said at the COP25 in Madrid, Spain that the US delegation is there to show the Congress is committed to climate actions.
你对此有何评论？
Would you like to comment?
答：大家都知道，《巴黎协定》是各方应对气候变化承诺的具体体现，美国已经宣布退出《巴黎协定》，所以我不知道她说承诺坚如磐石体现在什么地方？既然佩洛西女士称美方应对气候危机的承诺坚如磐石，我觉得这也很好，我们欢迎。
As you all know, the Paris Agreement is an embodiment of global commitments to address climate change. As the US has pulled out of it, I'm not sure what Ms. Pelosi was referring to by saying the US is committed to climate actions. We would of course welcome such commitment if it were true.
请美方履行承诺，立即恢复执行《巴黎协定》。
Why doesn't the US honor the commitment and come back to the Paris Agreement?
问：昨天外交部宣布中国将制裁“美国国家民主基金会”等美国非政府组织，因为他们“通过各种方式支持反中乱港分子”。
Yesterday, China announced sanctions on several US NGOs including the National Endowment for Democracy for supporting anti-China plotters who messed up Hong Kong through various means.
“美国国家民主基金会”等具体用什么样的方式支持反中乱港分子？“各种方式”具体指的是什么？
Can the Foreign Ministry clarify what "various means" refer to?
答：大量事实和证据已经表明，“美国国家民主基金会”等非政府组织为反中乱港分子提供资金、物资以及组织、培训等方面的支持，极力教唆他们从事极端暴力犯罪行为，煽动“港独”分裂活动，对当前香港乱局负有重大责任。
A large amount of facts and evidence have shown that the sanctioned NGOs including the NED have supported anti-China plotters who messed up Hong Kong through various means, for example, offering financial, logistic, organizational and training support, inciting extreme violent criminal acts and inflaming separatist activities. They are much to blame for the chaos in Hong Kong.
这些组织理应受到制裁，必须付出应有代价。
The sanctions are rightly imposed as these organizations shall pay the price for what they've done.
你对这些非政府组织具体是怎么做的感兴趣，我觉得这很好。
Your question about the "various means" is a very good one.
但今天由于时间原因，恐怕无法跟你详细列举。如果你要让我罗列的话，可能半小时都不够。
But in the interest of time, I cannot go into details for now, as that will probably take more than half an hour.
所以我很乐意尽快找时间跟你们共同社单独聊聊，给你们详细介绍一下。
I would very much like to have a conversation about this with you (Kyodo News) sometime soon, if you'd like that.
问：据报道，日前在伦敦发生的恐怖袭击中，英国警方在已制服嫌犯的情况下近距离开枪击毙了暴徒。
The British police shot dead the culprit at point-blank range in the latest London terrorist attack.
但我们注意到，此前英方却对香港警方对暴徒正常执法横加指责，暴露了其双重标准。
But we noticed previously the UK criticized the normal law enforcement by Hong Kong police against rioters, which reveals their double standards.
另据英国《卫报》披露，英国政府曾专门为涉暴恐犯罪人员设立名为“断念与脱离”（Desistance and Disengagement Programme, DDP)组织并强制性监控有关人员。
According to a Guardian report, the British government organized the Desistance and Disengagement Program (DDP), which conducted mandatory surveillance on convicted terrorists.
但DDP并未有效地阻止恐怖袭击。11月29日伦敦恐怖袭击的凶手就是曾参与该项目长达8年的学员。
But this scheme failed to prevent terrorist attacks, as the perpetrator of the November 29 terrorist attack was on the program for as long as eight years.
答：我注意到近日中方媒体对此有很多报道，也有不少反响。
We noted that many Chinese media outlets covered this and caused quite a stir.
正如昨天我提到的，恐怖主义是各国面临的共同挑战，在这个问题上绝对不应该有双重标准。
Like I said yesterday, terrorism is a common challenge to all countries and there's no place for double standards on this issue.
但非常不幸的是，我们看到在现实生活中，有一些国家在反恐问题上的确在奉行双重标准，希望他们能够汲取教训。
But unfortunately, we still see certain countries following double-standards in reality. We hope they can draw lessons.
正如英国《卫报》披露出，英国为涉暴恐犯罪人员设立了DDP项目。
Like what was revealed by the Guardian, the UK set up the DDP for convicted terrorists.
据我所知，还有其他20多个国家也采取了类似的为涉嫌暴恐犯罪分子专门设立的强制性项目。
As I understand, over 20 more countries have taken similar compulsory programs for terrorist criminals.
比如，法国在全国各大区设立去极端化中心，美国也推行“社区矫正”措施。
For example, France established de-radicalization centers in major communities nationwide and the US also has in place "community correction" measures .
我想，这些预防性反恐和去极端化项目设立的初衷和逻辑与中国新疆设立教培中心其实是一样的。
I believe that the aim and reason for initiating these preventive counterterrorism and de-radicalization measures are just the same as vocational education and training centers in Xinjiang.
只不过，新疆设立教培中心的举措更加系统、全面，也更加有效。
The latter is just more comprehensive, thus more effective.
新疆设立职业技能教育培训中心，是为了从根源上消除极端思想，从机制上普及法治教育，从职业技能上提升和创造就业机会，使那些受到极端和暴恐思想影响的人尽快回归社会，和别人一样过上正常幸福的生活。
Xinjiang has set up vocational education and training centers in order to root out extreme thoughts, enhance the rule of law awareness through education, improve vocational skills and create employment opportunities for them, so that those affected by extreme and violent ideas can return to society as soon as possible and live a normal and happy life.
大家都知道，在2016年底之前的20多年里，新疆深受暴恐袭击危害。
We all know that for more than 20 years before the end of 2016, Xinjiang suffered severely from violent terrorist attacks.
2009年震惊世界的新疆“7·5”事件造成197人死亡，1700多人受伤。
In the "July 5" incident in Xinjiang that shocked the world in 2009, 197 people were killed and more than 1,700 injured.
目前，新疆已3年没有发生一起暴恐事件。
But now, there hasn't been a single violent terrorist incident in Xinjiang for three years.
这就说明，新疆采取的去极端化和预防性反恐措施取得了实实在在的效果，也使新疆当地各族人民的安全感和幸福感得到很大提升。
This shows that the de-radicalization and preventive counter-terrorism measures adopted there have achieved tangible results, and also greatly improved the sense of security and happiness of the people of all ethnic groups in Xinjiang.
新疆开展的教培工作正是中国落实国际社会反恐和去极端化倡议，包括落实《联合国全球反恐战略》和《防止暴力极端主义行动计划》的具体步骤和具体体现。
The vocational education and training in Xinjiang is exactly a concrete step and manifestation of China's implementation of the international community's counter-terrorism and de-radicalization initiatives, including the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism.
去年底以来，全球已经有90多个国家和地区的1000多人包括联合国反恐事务副秘书长访问了新疆，他们都亲眼看到了新疆预防性反恐和去极端化措施所取得的显著积极成效。
Since the end of last year, more than 1,000 people from more than 90 countries and regions, including the UN Under-Secretary-General for Counter-Terrorism, have visited Xinjiang, and they have all witnessed the remarkable positive results of Xinjiang's preventive counter-terrorism and de-radicalization measures.
不久前联大三委同消除种族歧视委员会对话会上，虽然美国试图勾结一些盟友无端指责中国，但没有任何一个穆斯林国家指责中国；而60多个国家，包括很多穆斯林国家，都积极评价中国在新疆采取的反恐和去极端化举措。
At the Third Committee session on the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination not long ago, the US tried to collude with its allies to slander China, but not a single Muslim nation did what the US expected. Over 60 countries, including many Muslim ones, applauded China's counter-terrorism and de-radicalization efforts in Xinjiang.
因为去过新疆的人都亲眼看到了，新疆各民族是安居乐业的，各民族之间是团结的，都依法享有宗教自由和文化教育的权利。
Because those who visited Xinjiang saw with their own eyes people in Xinjiang enjoy a happy life and lawful rights of religious freedom and education and various ethnic groups live in harmony and solidarity.
这是事实。
These are all plain facts.
中国愿意将成功的经验与各国分享交流，通过加强反恐和去极端化的交流和合作，继续为推进国际反恐合作做出贡献。
China is ready to share successful experience with other countries, and continue to contribute to the international counter-terrorism cooperation through strengthening exchanges and cooperation in counter-terrorism and de-radicalization.
我们希望近日伦敦桥上的悲剧不再重演。
We hope that the latest tragedy on London Bridge will not be repeated.
问：美国驻北约大使哈奇森昨天接受美国媒体采访时称，中国已经发展成为一个对全球具有“威胁性”的国家，各国应考虑将中国纳入“基于规则的世界秩序”。
US Permanent Representative to NATO Ambassador Hutchison, said in an interview with US media that China is now a developed threat in the world and it's time to bring it "into the rules-based order."
她说，美国只是在寻求公平贸易，任何与中国有贸易往来的国际商界人士都支持特朗普总统的对华立场。
She also said that the US is only seeking fair trade and anyone in international business doing deals with China has been supportive of President Donald Trump's firm stance with Beijing.
中方对此有何回应？
Can I get a response on this?
答：美国驻北约大使的这番言论非常有意思，这位大使的自我感觉未免太好了。
These remarks are very interesting. Maybe Ambassador Hutchison has too much confidence.
说到“威胁”，我记得今年年初，皮尤研究中心公布了一项国际民调，有45%的受访者认为美国对本国构成重大威胁。
Speaking of threat, results of a global Pew poll early this year show that 45 percent of those surveyed think the US poses a serious threat to their countries.
就连美国的一些盟友也不喜欢美国现在在国际上的角色。
Even some US allies don't like its role today in the world.
比如，德国和法国视美国为威胁的民众的比例达到49%，在日本是66%，在韩国是67%。
In Germany and France, 49 percent see the US as a threat. The proportion for Japan and South Korea is 66 and 67 percent respectively.
所以谁是威胁，这是一目了然的。
So it is only too clear who is the threat.
说到“规则”，美国“毁约”“退群”成瘾，已经相继退出联合国教科文组织、联合国人权理事会等国际组织，退出《巴黎协定》、《伊朗核问题全面协议》、《中导条约》等一系列国际条约，还拒不签署联合国《儿童权利公约》、《消除对妇女一切形式歧视公约》等重要人权公约。
Speaking of rules, the US has become addicted to withdrawing from commitments. It has pulled out of international organizations including UNESCO and UNHRC. It has also withdrawn from international treaties like the Paris Agreement, the JCPOA and the INF. It also refuses to ratify important human rights instruments such as the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women.
世界上很多领导人和政要都由衷感叹，现在世界正面临着多边主义和单边主义的斗争，幸好我们有中国站在多边主义和国际规则一边。
Many world leaders have exclaimed that as the world is challenged by unilateralism, it is good to have China on the side of multilateralism and international rules.
说到“贸易”，美国到处发动贸易战，大肆挥舞关税大棒，严重破坏了国际贸易秩序，不仅损害了本国企业和人民的利益，还成为全球经济复苏的最大不确定因素和风险源。
Speaking of trade, the US is undermining the international trade order by waging trade wars and wantonly imposing tariffs. It has not only hurt Americans' interests, but has also become the top source of uncertainty and risks.
我们接触过的国际人士包括美国企业界人士，没有人赞同支持美单边主义和贸易保护主义。
I have never met anyone in support of US trade protectionism, not even business people from the US itself.
不信，你可以去问问在华运营的美国公司的人士，或者来华访问的美国公司负责人。
If you are not convinced, just ask American business people based in or visiting China.
就在前不久，很多外国前政要和各国企业界重量级人士来华参加2019年“创新经济论坛”，他们的一个强烈共识是，对美方单边主义行径表示忧虑和反对。
Not long ago, former leaders and business people from all over the world came to China for the 2019 New Economy Forum. A strong consensus at the forum is concerns about and opposition to US unilateral acts.
我们希望这位美国驻北约大使一定要对自己的国家有清醒的认识，对世界有清醒的认识，这是作为大使的职责。
We hope this ambassador will have a sober understanding of her country and the wider world, which is her due responsibility.
美方焦虑了，可以理解，但任何时候都要讲理。
The US may have reasons to feel anxious, but it has to be reasonable.
问：据报道，11月30日，纳米比亚全国大选结果公布，根哥布总统赢得56.3%选票，胜选连任。
Namibia's general election results came out on November 30. President Hage Geingob has won another term with 56.3% of the vote.
答：中方高兴地看到纳米比亚大选顺利举行，对根哥布先生再次当选纳米比亚总统表示祝贺。
China is glad to see the smooth general election in Namibia and congratulates Mr. Geingob on his re-election.
相信在他的领导下，纳米比亚政府和人民将积极进取，不断取得更大发展成就。
We believe that under his leadership, the Namibian government and people will forge ahead to score greater achievements.
中国和纳米比亚有着深厚的传统友谊。
China and Namibia have a deep traditional friendship.
我们高度重视同纳米比亚的关系，愿继续同纳方积极开展友好互利合作，推动两国关系继续向前发展。
The Chinese side values relations with Namibia and stands ready to advance mutually beneficial cooperation to enhance our comprehensive strategic partnership of cooperation and benefit the two peoples.
问：《环球时报》主编今天发推特称，据他所知，由于美国会拟通过“2019年维吾尔人权政策法案”，中国正考虑对在涉疆问题上表现恶劣的美国官员及议员实施签证限制。
The Global Times' editor-in-chief said in his twitter today that based on what he knows, since the US Congress plans to pass the Uyghur Human Rights Policy Act of 2019, China is considering to impose visa restrictions on US officials and lawmakers who have made odious performance on the Xinjiang issue.
他还说，中国政府可能禁止所有持外交护照的美国人进入新疆。
He also said that China might also ban all US diplomatic passport holders from entering Xinjiang.
你能否证实？对此有何评论？
I wonder if you could confirm or give any comment on this?
答：你知道中国政府反对外部势力干涉中国内政的决心是坚定不移的，中国政府维护国家主权、安全、发展利益的决心也是坚定不移的。
China is fully determined to oppose interference in internal affairs by any external forces and to safeguard national sovereignty, security and development interests.
中方将根据形势发展采取必要措施。
We will take further steps if necessary as the situation evolves.
问：据报道，比利时、丹麦、芬兰、荷兰、瑞典和挪威2日发表联合声明，宣布加入对伊朗“贸易结算支持机制”（INSTEX），中方对此有何评论？
Belgium, Denmark, Finland, the Netherlands, Sweden and Norway declared in a joint statement on December 2 that they will join the INSTEX mechanism for trade with Iran. What is your comment?
答：我们注意到有关报道。
We note the reports.
建立对伊朗“贸易结算支持机制”是欧方维护伊核全面协议作出的重要努力，体现了欧方坚持多边主义、维护以国际法为基础的国际秩序的决心，中方对此表示高度赞赏。
INSTEX marks an important effort on the European side to safeguard the JCPOA. It reflects a determination to uphold multilateralism and the international order based on international law. China highly commends that.
我们欢迎欧洲六国的决定，支持“贸易结算支持机制”建设持续取得进展，这有助于促进欧方和伊朗的合作，为维护全面协议发挥实效。
We welcome this decision made by the six countries and support efforts to move forward the INSTEX. It will help promote cooperation between Europe and Iran and ensure the implementation of the JCPOA.
我们期待该机制尽快扩大业务涵盖范畴，并向欧盟国家以外的第三方开放，为促进国际社会与伊朗正常经贸合作作出贡献。
We hope this mechanism will soon cover more areas and open up to non-EU countries as third parties to facilitate the normal economic and trade cooperation between Iran and the international community.
问：王毅国务委员本周将访问韩国，这是五年来中国外长首次访韩。
State Councilor Wang Yi will visit the ROK this week, the first time the Chinese foreign minister has visited the country in five years.
你能否介绍此访目的？
Do you have details on the purpose of his visit and what he hopes to accomplish?
答：王毅国务委员将于12月4日至5日访问韩国。
State Councilor Wang Yi will visit the ROK from December 4 to 5.
中韩互为重要近邻和合作伙伴，当前两国关系保持良好发展势头，双方在国际地区问题上保持密切协调合作。
China and the ROK are important, close neighbors and cooperative partners. Bilateral relations have been growing with a sound momentum. The two sides maintain close coordination and cooperation on international and regional issues.
此次访问期间，王毅国务委员将会见韩国领导人，同康京和外长举行会谈，双方将就双边关系和共同关心的问题深入交换意见。
During the visit, State Councilor Wang will meet with ROK leaders and hold talks with Foreign Minister Kang Kyung-wha to exchange ideas over bilateral ties and issues of common interest.
有关消息我们会及时发布。
We will keep you updated if there is new information.
2019年12月2日外交部发言人华春莹主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Hua Chunying's Regular Press Conference on December 2, 2019
日前，美方不顾中方坚决反对，执意将所谓“香港人权与民主法案”签署成法，这严重违反国际法和国际关系基本准则，严重干涉中国内政，中方已就此表明坚决态度。
Recently, in disregard of China's opposition, the US signed into law the so-called Hong Kong Human Rights and Democracy Act. This is in severe violation of international law and basic norms governing international relations and serious interference in China's internal affairs.
针对美方无理行为，中国政府决定自即日起暂停审批美军舰机赴港休整的申请，同时对“美国国家民主基金会”、“美国国际事务民主协会”、“美国国际共和研究所”、“人权观察”、“自由之家”等在香港修例风波中表现恶劣的非政府组织实施制裁。
In response to the unreasonable US practice, the Chinese government decides to suspend reviewing requests of US military vessels and aircraft to visit Hong Kong starting from today and to impose sanctions on NGOs that played a egregious role in the recent disturbance related to an amendment bill in Hong Kong, including the National Endowment for Democracy, the National Democratic Institute for International Affairs, the International Republican Institute, Human Rights Watch and Freedom House.
中方敦促美方纠正错误，停止任何插手香港事务、干涉中国内政的言行，中方将根据形势发展采取进一步必要行动，坚定捍卫香港稳定繁荣，坚定捍卫中国主权、安全、发展利益。
China urges the US to correct its wrongdoing and stop meddling in China's affairs, including Hong Kong affairs. China will take further measures if necessary as the situation evolves to firmly safeguard stability and prosperity in Hong Kong and China's sovereignty, security and development interests.
问：中方为何对美国有关非政府组织实施制裁？
Why did China decide to sanction these US-based NGOs?
答：大量事实和证据表明，有关非政府组织通过各种方式支持反中乱港分子，极力教唆他们从事极端暴力犯罪行为，煽动“港独”分裂活动，对当前香港乱局负有重大责任。
A large amount of facts and evidence have shown that these NGOs have supported anti-China plotters who messed up Hong Kong through various means, aiding and abetting them in extreme violent criminal acts and inciting "Hong Kong independence" separatist activities. They are much to blame for the chaos in Hong Kong.
问：12月1日是孟晚舟事件发生满一年，请问中方对此有何评论？
Yesterday marks the one-year anniversary of the Meng Wanzhou case. I wonder if you have any comment?
答：去年12月1日，中国公民、华为公司副董事长孟晚舟被加拿大应美方要求无理拘押，迄今已经一整年了。
On December 1 last year, Deputy Chairwoman of Huawei Meng Wanzhou was arrested without cause by the Canadian side at the behest of the US. It has been one year since then.
中方在孟晚舟事件上的立场是一贯和明确的。
China's position on this incident is clear-cut and firm.
美加两国滥用其双边引渡条约，对中国公民任意采取强制措施，严重侵犯中国公民合法权益，这是一起严重的政治事件。
The US and Canada abused their bilateral extradition treaty and arbitrarily took compulsive measures against a Chinese citizen without cause. This is a serious political incident that grossly violates the legitimate rights and interests of the Chinese citizen.
中国政府维护中国公民和企业正当合法权益的决心是坚定不移的。
The Chinese government is steadfast in safeguarding the legitimate rights and interests of Chinese citizens and businesses.
我们再次强烈敦促加方认真对待中方严正立场和关切，以切实举措纠正错误，及早释放孟晚舟女士，确保她早日平安回到祖国。
Once again we strongly urge the Canadian side to take China's solemn position and concerns seriously, release Ms. Meng immediately and ensure her safe return to China at an early date.
顺便说一句，我今天上午也看到了孟晚舟女士在她被无理拘押一周年之际写的一封亲笔信，题目是《你们的温暖，是照亮我前行的灯塔》。
By the way, I also saw Ms. Meng's letter Your Warmth Is a Beacon that Lights My Way Forward written exactly one year into arbitrary detention.
我看了以后非常感动。
I was deeply touched.
孟晚舟女士作为一名被无理扣押的无辜的中国公民，作为年幼孩子的母亲和年迈父母的女儿，在经历了这么多痛苦、失望和无奈之后，仍然能如此坚强和优雅地面对，令人感到十分敬佩。
Ms. Meng is an innocent Chinese citizen held without cause. With young children and elderly parents, she has gone through so much pain, disappointment and helplessness. Her strength and grace through all this is highly admirable. We sincerely hope she will be home soon.
我们衷心祝愿她早日平安回家，也希望大家用更多的正义和温暖照亮孟晚舟女士前行、回家的灯塔。
We also hope there will be more righteousness and warmth to light up her way home .
问：据报道，11月29日，在曼谷闭幕的联合国亚太妇女权益审议会议以37：1的投票结果，通过《北京宣言25周年——促进性别平等和妇女赋权亚太部长级宣言》。
According to reports, on November 29, the latest session of the Commission on the Status of Women concluded in Bangkok. It passed the Asia-Pacific Declaration on Advancing Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment: Beijing+25 Review 37 to 1.
投票结果一经公布，现场一片欢呼并长时间鼓掌。
As the voting results were announced, there were cheers and ovation.
美国是唯一投下反对票的国家。
The US is the only one voting no.
一些国家包括美盟友也公开发言对美国的顽固立场表达失望。
Some countries, including US allies, openly expressed disappointment.
答：这个报道让我想起去年3月在日内瓦发生的一幕。去年3月，日内瓦联合国人权理事会第37次会议以28:1的压倒性多数通过了“在人权领域促进合作共赢”决议，美国是当时唯一投反对票的国家。
This reminds me of the 37th session of the UN Human Rights Council last March, when the resolution "promoting mutually beneficial cooperation in the field of human rights" was passed 28 to 1.
这次曼谷联合国亚太妇女权益审议会议通过《北京宣言25周年--促进性别平等和妇女赋权亚太部长级宣言》，美国再次成为唯一的反对者。这些都非常生动和贴切地说明，美国在国际道义上已成为孤家寡人。
The US was the only one voting no. Now as the latest session of the Commission on the Status of Women passed the Asia-Pacific Declaration on Advancing Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment: Beijing+25 Review, the US was once again the only country voting no. This vividly shows how the US stands alone against other countries that uphold international justice.
美国拒绝支持《北京宣言25周年--促进性别平等和妇女赋权亚太部长级宣言》，有什么难言之隐呢？
What could be the reason behind the US voting against the declaration?
根据我看到的权威统计，美国国内存在着严重的性别歧视问题，严重妨碍妇女人权的实现。
Convincing statistics show severe gender discrimination in the US that hinders women's realization of human rights.
根据盖洛普咨询公司网站发布的调查数据，46%的美国女性受访者对自己的社会地位表示不满或非常不满。
Gallop data show that 46 percent of surveyed women in the US are disappointed or extremely disappointed in their social status.
去年1月美国数百万人参加“2018女性游行”，对性别政策表示强烈抗议。
In January last year, millions took part in "Women's March 2018" to express strong protest against gender policies.
美国还阻碍保障和促进妇女权利的国际努力。
Besides, the US also thwarted international efforts to safeguard and enhance women's rights.
大家都知道，美国迄今未批准《消除对妇女一切形式歧视公约》这一联合国核心人权公约。
As we all know, it has yet to ratify the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women, a core UN human rights instrument.
人权并不是一句口号，它应该是具体的、实践的。
Human rights is not a slogan to be chanted; it should be concrete and tangible actions.
美国在这些人权问题上的具体表现，与它长期自诩为“人权卫士”形成了强烈的反差，是莫大的讽刺。
What the US practices on human rights is in sharp contrast with what it preaches. This is the greatest irony.
事实说明，美国绝对不是它自诩的“人权卫士”，而是“人权侵害者”。或者说，美国根本不是Human Rights Defender，而恰恰是 Human Rights offender 或Human Rights Abuser。
The US is by no means the "human rights defender" it claims to be, but a human rights offender or abuser.
我们希望美方不要再动辄以人权为借口伸长手干涉别国内政，而要多把心思和精力用在真正践行保护人权和解决自身严重人权问题上。
The US should really spend more efforts on human rights protection at home instead of interfering in other countries' domestic affairs with human rights as a cover.
问：据报道，11月29日，1名身着伪造自杀式炸弹背心的男子在英国伦敦市伦敦桥附近持刀行凶，造成2人死亡。该男子最终被警方击毙。
On November 29, a man wearing a fake suicide vest killed two people with a knife on London Bridge, and was later shot dead by police.
中方对此有何评论？
Do you have any comment?
这是一起不幸的案件，我们对无辜遇难者表示哀悼，对他们的家属和受伤人员表示慰问。
This is a tragedy. We express condolences to the victims and offer our sympathies to the bereaved families and the injured.
我们也对英国警方采取果断措施应对有关暴恐行为表示理解和支持。
We understand and support the resolute measures taken by British police.
同时，很多人跟我一样都在想，如果这起恐袭案件发生在中国，英国、美国的媒体会怎样报道和解读？根据以往的经历，估计他们会把凶手美化成被压迫而不得不反抗的“斗士”，质疑警察近距离开枪击毙凶手是“过度使用暴力”。
In the meantime, I am wondering, like many others, how would British and US media interpret it if this terror attack happened in China? Based on what we experienced, they would probably whitewash the perpetrator as a "fighter" rising against repression and accuse the police of "excessive use of violence" for shooting at point-blank range.
另一方面，据媒体报道，此案凶手有暴恐前科。
On the other hand, media reports reveal that the culprit had terror-related record.
他曾于2012年因企图对伦敦地标发动爆炸袭击而被判处有期徒刑16年，去年底有条件获释并提前出狱。
He was sentenced to 16 years in 2012 for planning to blow up a landmark building in London and then released on license early at the end of last year.
去年12月，法国斯特拉斯堡发生了一起暴恐案件，相关凶手也有犯罪入狱记录，一度还被法国警方列入“极端人员监视名单”。
Similarly, the culprit of the terrorist attack in Strasbourg, France last December had served time in prison and was on France's "S" file terrorist watch list.
出狱后不久，他就在斯特拉斯堡圣诞集市上再次发动恐袭，酿成了无可挽回的悲剧。
After his release, he conducted another terrorist attack at a Christmas market in Strasbourg, leading to another irreversible tragedy.
我想这些都充分说明，恐怖主义是世界各国面临的共同挑战，恐怖分子从来不分国籍、不分宗教、不分性别、不分年龄，因此反恐也绝不应有“双重标准”。
All this shows again that terrorism is a common challenge to all countries. Terrorism knows no nationality, religion, gender or age, and there should be no double standards when it comes to fighting terrorism.
各国应该加强合作，共同探索更加有效的预防性反恐和去极端化措施，维护各国的共同安全。
Countries should step up cooperation and explore more effective preventive counterterrorism and deradicalization measures to uphold common security.
问：今天澳大利亚宣布成立新的情报小组应对间谍行为和外来干涉。
Today Australia announced a new intelligence task force to combat espionage and foreign interference.
中方对澳方决定有何评论？是否会干涉澳内政？
How does China feel about that decision and and has China set to interfere in Australian politics?
澳外交部长表示中方对待被拘押澳学者的方式是“不可接受”的。
Also, Australian foreign minister described the treatment of the Australian author detained in China as "unacceptable".
你对此有何回应？
Do you have any response to that?
答：你提这个问题，我倒想起来，这两天你应该也关注到了，澳大利亚一些部门、媒体和学者纷纷对前几天澳大利亚媒体和一些英美媒体爆炒的王立强“间谍案”提出了质疑。
Your question reminds me of something I saw. Perhaps you have also noted that recently people from Australia's government, media and academic sectors questioned the Wang Liqiang "espionage case" hyped up by Australian, British and US media.
我看到有报道称，澳大利亚安全部门已经向澳总理内阁国家安全委员会解释称，王提供的资讯缺乏细节，他很可能是以间谍为借口，在当地寻求庇护或居留权。
I've seen reports that Australian security authorities explained to the National Security Committee of Cabinet that Wang's information lacks details, and it is very likely that he is using espionage as an excuse to seek asylum or residence permit.
我还注意到澳大利亚《每日电讯报》以“中国间谍闹剧”为标题，认为王立强是企图利用虚假证词来换取政治庇护或居留权。
I also saw an article China Spy Farce published on Australia's Daily Telegraph, saying Wang is attempting to seek political asylum or residence permit with false testimony.
还有澳大利亚学者认为，澳涉华议题总是在有确凿证据之前就被妄下定论。
Some Australian academics believe that when it comes to issues about China in their country, conclusions are often drawn in the absence of firm evidence.
这些都充分印证了一段时间以来，澳大利亚个别媒体和机构热衷炒作的所谓“中国间谍案”、“中国渗透论”、“中国干涉论”，无论情节如何离奇，花样如何翻新，其实都不过是十分荒唐可笑的闹剧和粗制滥造的肥皂剧而已。
For quite some time, certain Australian media and institutions have been hyping up the so-called "China espionage cases", "China infiltration stories" or "China interference theory". No matter how bizarre and outlandish, they are just one ridiculous farce or shoddy soap opera after another.
这些现象的出现的确令人匪夷所思。
This case is further proof.
有那么一些人，宁愿相信个别别有用心的撒谎者，也不愿相信中方发布的权威消息。
It is indeed baffling that some people would believe liars with ulterior motives rather than official information from the Chinese government.
王立强案只是其中一例，看似愚蠢透顶，但其中反映的问题是非常严肃的，值得每一个人深思和警惕。
Wang Liqiang is just one case in point. All should reflect upon and stay on high alert to what lies beneath such foolish and absurd acts.
我们希望有关方面从中汲取深刻教训，摒弃偏见，尊重事实，不要再犯此类低级错误。
We urge relevant sides to draw a lesson from this, discard prejudice, respect facts and avoid repeating such glaring mistakes.
问：我们注意到外交部副部长马朝旭昨天和伊朗副外长阿拉格齐在北京举行伊朗核问题磋商。
We note that China's Vice Foreign Minister Ma Zhaoxu and Iran's Deputy Foreign Minister Araghchi held consultations on the Iranian nuclear issue in Beijing yesterday.
你能否介绍有关情况？
Could you offer more information?
答：美国退出伊核全面协议并对伊朗极限施压，导致伊核局势持续紧张，全面协议有崩盘的风险。
The US withdrawal from the JCPOA and maximum pressure on Iran led to continued tension that risks the total collapse of the agreement.
在此背景下，马朝旭副部长和阿拉格齐副外长12月1日在北京举行磋商，就伊核局势、全面协议执行等问题深入交换意见，达成广泛共识。
Under such circumstances, Vice Foreign Minister Ma and Deputy Foreign Minister Araghchi held consultations in Beijing on December 1. They exchanged in-depth views on such issues as the Iranian nuclear situation and implementation of the JCPOA and reached broad consensus.
双方同意加强合作，继续推动完整、有效执行全面协议，维护以国际法为基础的国际秩序，坚持政治外交解决方向，增进国际和地区和平与稳定。
The two sides agreed to strengthen cooperation, continue to work for the full and effective implementation of the deal, uphold the international order based on international law, stay committed to political and diplomatic resolution, and uphold regional and international peace and stability.
中国和伊朗是全面战略伙伴，双方将落实好两国元首共识，不断巩固政治互信，继续深化各领域务实合作，丰富中伊全面战略伙伴关系内涵，更好造福两国和两国人民。
China and Iran are comprehensive strategic partners. The two sides will implement the consensus between our heads of state, continue to cement political mutual trust, deepen practical cooperation, enrich our comprehensive strategic partnership to benefit the two countries and peoples.
伊核问题是中伊战略合作的重要内容，双方将继续为维护全面协议作出不懈努力。
As the Iranian nuclear issue is an important part of China-Iran strategic cooperation, the two sides will continue to work to uphold the JCPOA.
问：据报道，萨尔瓦多总统布克尔正在中国进行国事访问。
El Salvador's President Nayib Bukele is now on a state visit in China.
美国驻萨尔瓦多使馆公共事务负责人称，美方正在评估，萨政府接受中国提出的协议是否会影响美萨部分合作。
A senior official in the Public Affairs Office of the US Embassy in El Salvador said that the US is evaluating whether some of the US-Salvador cooperation will be affected if the Salvadorian government accepts China's deal.
不少国家被中国的协议吸引，然后感到后悔。
Many countries were drawn by the deals China offered and then regretted their decisions.
我们要警告和帮助萨尔瓦多不要落入同样的陷阱。
The US needs to warn and help El Salvador from the same trap.
答：的确，萨尔瓦多总统布克尔已经抵达中国，明天将与中国领导人有一系列正式活动。
Indeed Salvadorian President Bukele has arrived in China. There will be a series of official activities with Chinese leaders tomorrow.
我们期待以布克尔总统此访为契机，推动中萨关系不断向前发展。
We look forward to taking the visit as an opportunity to promote bilateral relations.
我也注意到你提到的美方有关人士的言论。
I also saw the remarks by the US official you mentioned.
美方有关人士言论是对中萨正常合作再赤裸不过的公开威胁，十分蛮横无理。
They are open, blatant and peremptory threats to the normal cooperation between China and El Salvador.
早在40年前，美国就同中国建立外交关系并在广泛领域开展合作，如今却无理阻挠其他主权国家同中国开展正常合作，这种做法毫无道理，不仅是小人之举，而且是强盗逻辑。
The US established diplomatic ties with the People's Republic of China four decades ago and have conducted cooperation with it in a wide range of areas ever since. It simply makes no sense for the US to obstruct other sovereign countries' wish to develop relations and cooperate with China. It is a despicable move driven by hegemonic logic.
我想强调的是，中方一贯本着平等和相互尊重的原则同其他国家开展合作，我们与有关国家的合作是互利共赢的，不影响、不针对有关国家同第三方的合作。
I want to emphasize that China conducts cooperation with other countries on the basis of equality and mutual respect. Such win-win cooperation does not affect or target cooperation with any third party.
希望美方能拿出正常国家应有的风度，言行得体，客观理性、开放包容地看待其他国家同中方发展关系或开展合作。
We hope the US will act with becoming decency, and view other countries' wish to develop relations and cooperate with China in an objective, rational, open and inclusive attitude.
问：你能否提供更多关于暂停审批美军舰机赴港休整申请的细节？
I just wanted to ask for more details about the maritime restrictions you mentioned.
这项制裁是否仅针对军舰？
Is that just restricted to military vessels?
制裁是否有期限？
Is there any time limit on the sanctions?
答：我刚才已经说了，中国政府决定从即日起暂停审批美军舰机赴港休整的申请，暂停到什么时候要看美方的实际行动。
Like I said, the Chinese government decides to suspend reviewing requests of US military vessels and aircraft to visit Hong Kong starting from today. As for how long the suspension will last, it depends on how the US acts.
问：澳大利亚外长称中方对待杨军的方式“不可接受”。有消息称澳方最近的领事探视显示杨遭到了“折磨”，中方对此有何评论？
Could you give China's response to the Australian foreign minister who called the treatment of Yang Jun "unacceptable" following reports from a recent consular visit that he was being tortured?
答：刚才我已经一并回答了《华尔街日报》记者的有关问题。
Actually I already answered a similar question from the Wall Street Journal.
最近有这么多所谓“间谍”案的消息出来，但后来一个个都被证明是错误的。
Lately there have been so many "espionage" cases, but one after another, they have all been proven to be false.
王立强案、郑文杰案，哪一个不是证明他们都是在撒谎？难道还不应该从中汲取教训吗？
From Wang Liqiang to Simon Cheng, so many cases have exposed the lies. Shouldn't one learn from that?
你提到的这个案子，我们已经多次表明了中方原则立场。
As to the specific case you mentioned, we've stated our position repeatedly.
中国国家安全机关依法办案，充分保障当事人的各项权利。
China's national security organ handles the case in accordance with law and fully guarantees Yang's rights.
你提到的这个人，据我了解，目前健康状况良好，不存在你提到的所谓“折磨”问题。
To my knowledge, he is in good physical condition. The so-called "torture" is simply non-existent.
我希望你们媒体都应该有基本的常识，有基本的判断，能分清楚哪些是fake news（假新闻）。
I hope media agencies will have the basic sense to make proper judgments and discern fake news.
宁可去相信撒谎者的谎言，而不去相信一个国家、一个负责任政府发布的权威信息，这是很可怕的，也是非常危险的。
It is dreadful and highly dangerous to believe liars instead of information released by a responsible government.
问：外交部能否证实近期有伯利兹公民和台湾居民因参与香港示威活动而被逮捕？
I was wondering if the foreign ministry could confirm that citizens from Belize and Taiwan were detained recently specifically for their involvement in the Hong Kong protests?
答：具体情况你需要去问中方有关部门。
I refer you to relevant authorities.
问：今天你宣布中方将对美国有关非政府组织实施制裁。能否提供更多细节？
Could you please elaborate a bit on the sanctions on the American NGOs today you announced?
答：我刚才已经说了，中国政府决定自即日起暂停审批美军舰机赴港休整的申请，同时对我刚才列名的“美国国家民主基金会”等在香港修例风波中表现恶劣的非政府组织实施制裁。
As I just said, the Chinese government decides to suspend reviewing requests of US military vessels and aircraft to make stops in Hong Kong starting from today and to impose sanctions on NGOs that played a egregious role in the recent disturbance related to an amendment bill in Hong Kong, including the National Endowment for Democracy.
理由非常简单，已经有大量事实和证据表明，这些非政府组织通过各种方式支持反中乱港分子，极力教唆他们从事极端暴力犯罪行为，煽动“港独”分裂活动，对当前香港乱局负有重大责任。
The reason is very simple. A large amount of facts and evidence have shown that these NGOs have supported anti-China plotters who messed up Hong Kong through various means, aiding and abetting them in extreme violent criminal acts and inciting "Hong Kong independence" separatist activities. They are much to blame for the chaos in Hong Kong.
这也是中方维护国家主权、安全、发展利益的应有之举。
This is only what a government should do to defend national sovereignty, security and development interests.
2019年11月29日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on November 29, 2019
一、12月1日，国家副主席王岐山将应邀出席在广州举行的“2019从都国际论坛”开幕式。
I. Vice President Wang Qishan will attend upon invitation the opening ceremony of the 2019 Imperial Springs International Forum on December 1 in Guangzhou.
二、应芬兰方面邀请，国务院副总理孙春兰将于12月2日至5日赴芬兰出席“2019中芬冬季运动年”闭幕式。
II. At the invitation of the Finnish side, Vice Premier Sun Chunlan of the State Council will attend the closing ceremony of the 2019 China-Finland Year of Winter Sports in Finland from December 2 to 5.
三、应中共中央政治局委员、中央外事工作委员会办公室主任杨洁篪和中共中央政治局委员、中央书记处书记、中央政法委书记郭声琨邀请，俄罗斯联邦安全会议秘书帕特鲁舍夫将于12月1日至4日来华举行中俄第十五轮战略安全磋商和中俄执法安全合作机制第六次会议。
III. At the invitation of Yang Jiechi, member of the Political Bureau of the Communist Party of China (CPC) Central Committee and Director of the Office of the Foreign Affairs Commission of the CPC Central Committee, and Guo Shengkun, member of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee, Secretary of the Secretariat of the CPC Central Committee and head of the Commission for Political and Legal Affairs of the CPC Central Committee, Secretary Patrushev of the Security Council of the Russian Federation will travel to China for the 15th round of China-Russia strategic security consultation and the 6th meeting of the China-Russia law-enforcement and security cooperation mechanism from December 1 to 4.
帕特鲁舍夫安全会议秘书在华期间，中方领导人将会见，杨洁篪主任将同帕特鲁舍夫举行中俄第十五轮战略安全磋商，郭声琨书记将同帕特鲁舍夫举行中俄执法安全合作机制第六次会议。
While Secretary Patrushev is in China, Chinese leaders will meet with him, Director Yang will hold with him the 15th round of China-Russia strategic security consultation, and Secretary Guo will hold with him the 6th meeting of the China-Russia law-enforcement and security cooperation mechanism.
这是中俄关系进入新时代后，双方首次举办两机制会议，是落实两国元首年内多次会晤共识的重要举措。
It will be the first time the two meetings are held after bilateral relations entered a new era. This will be an important step for implementing the two presidents' consensus reached at multiple meetings within the year.
在当前国际安全形势复杂多变的背景下，中俄作为世界大国和安理会常任理事国，在维护世界和平稳定方面肩负更加重要的责任。
Faced with the complex and fluid international security landscape, China and Russia, both major countries and permanent members of the UN Security Council, shoulder greater responsibility to world peace and stability.
相信本次两机制会议将进一步巩固双方在安全领域的一致立场，推动中俄安全合作取得更多成果，为促进世界和平安宁作出更大贡献。
We believe the two meetings will further consolidate the two sides' common ground in security, ensure more fruitful cooperation and contribute to world peace and tranquility.
问：据报道，中俄两国于11月27日举行了战略稳定磋商。
Reports say China and Russia held consultations on strategic stability on November 27.
能否介绍有关情况？
Can you offer more details?
答：相信你已经看到，中方已就此发布消息稿。
I believe you have read our press release on that.
中俄战略稳定磋商于11月27日在北京举行。
China and Russia held consultations on strategic stability in Beijing on November 27.
中国外交部副部长马朝旭同俄罗斯副外长里亚布科夫就国际安全形势、多边军控与裁军、中导等双方共同关心的问题深入交换了看法。
Vice Foreign Minister Ma Zhaoxu exchanged views with Russian Vice Foreign Minister Ryabkov on issues of mutual concern including the international security situation, multilateral arms control and disarmament, and intermediate-range missiles.
双方就加强战略协作、维护全球战略稳定达成广泛共识。
The two sides reached broad consensus on strengthening strategic coordination and upholding global strategic stability.
双方还就伊朗核问题进行了沟通协调。
They also held communication and coordination over the Iranian nuclear issue.
问：关于美方签署“香港人权与民主法案”的问题，你昨天表示中方将予以坚决反制。
A question on the US signing the Hong Kong Human Rights and Democracy Act into law. You said yesterday that China will take strong countermeasures.
具体是何种措施？
What kind of countermeasures are you gonna take?
答：昨天我在记者会上已经回答过有关问题。
I responded to similar questions yesterday.
美方将所谓“香港人权与民主法案”签署成法，中国政府和中国人民坚决反对。
The Chinese government and people firmly oppose the signing of the Hong Kong Human Rights and Democracy Act into law.
中方已就此向美方提出严正交涉和强烈抗议。
We have made stern representations and strong protests to the US side.
美方此举严重干预香港事务，严重干涉中国内政，严重违反国际法和国际关系基本准则，是赤裸裸的霸权行径。
It is a stark hegemonic practice, and it is a severe interference in Hong Kong affairs, which are China's internal affairs. It also seriously violates international law and the basic norms governing international relations.
对于美方干涉中国内政、损害中方利益的行径，中方必将采取有力措施坚决反制。
China will take strong counter-measures in response to the US behavior that interferes in China's internal affairs and undermines China's interests.
任何人都不要低估中方维护国家主权、安全、发展利益的坚定决心，也不要低估中方贯彻“一国两制”方针、维护香港繁荣稳定的坚定决心。
No one shall underestimate China's determination in safeguarding national sovereignty, security and development interests. Nor shall they misjudge China's resolve in implementing the "one country, two systems" principle and in upholding prosperity and stability in Hong Kong.
问：据报道，澳大利亚政府日前宣布向巴布亚新几内亚提供4.4亿澳元优惠贷款，用于支持巴新财政预算和经济发展。上述贷款利率为2.5%，优惠幅度较大。
The Australian government recently announced its decision to provide AUD $440 million of concessional loans to Papua New Guinea for its fiscal budget and economic growth with a rather low interest rate of 2.5 percent.
答：中方乐见有关国家向太平洋岛国提供支持和帮助，这是我们的一贯立场。
China is pleased to see other countries giving a helping hand to Pacific island countries. That is our consistent position.
只要是有利于岛国和岛国人民的事情，各方都应该本着开放包容的态度，积极致力于实现合作共赢。
As long as it is good for the island countries and their people, all sides could participate in open, inclusive and win-win cooperation.
在同岛国开展合作过程中，中方始终将岛国和岛国人民的需求和利益放在首位。
China prioritizes the needs and interests of island countries and their people during our cooperation.
我们欢迎所有各方都能够多出真金白银，将有关承诺落到实处。
We welcome more funds offered by other sides and fulfillment of their commitments.
问：当地时间11月28日，乌拉圭执政联盟“广泛阵线”总统候选人马丁内斯已祝贺反对党民族党候选人拉卡列当选乌新一届总统。
On November 28 local time, presidential candidate Daniel Martinez of Uruguay's governing coalition the Broad Front congratulated Luis Lacalle Pou, candidate of the opposition National Party, who was elected to be the new president.
中方对此有何评论？
I wonder if China has any comment?
答：中方祝贺拉卡列先生当选乌拉圭新一届总统。
China congratulates Mr. Lacalle on being elected the new president of Uruguay.
相信在他的领导下，乌拉圭国家建设和发展将取得新的成就。
We believe the country under his leadership will achieve new progress in national development.
中乌互为战略伙伴。
China and Uruguay are strategic partners.
建交31年来，两国关系取得长足发展，各领域务实合作成果丰硕。
Our relations have come a long way since diplomatic relations were established 31 years ago. We enjoy fruitful cooperation in various sectors.
中方高度重视中乌关系发展，愿同乌方一道努力，巩固友好互信，深化互利合作，推动中乌战略伙伴关系取得更大发展，进一步造福两国人民。
China values this relationship and would like to work with Uruguay to cement friendship and mutual trust, deepen mutually-beneficial cooperation, and achieve greater progress to further benefit both peoples.
问：日本前首相中曾根康弘于今日去世。
Former Japanese Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone passed away today.
中方对此有何评论？
Could you offer some words on that?
答：中曾根康弘前首相是日本有远见的资深政治家，生前热心对华友好交流和务实合作，为推动中日关系发展作出了重要贡献。
Former Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone was a veteran Japanese politician with vision. He was enthusiastic in promoting friendly exchange and practical cooperation with China, making important contributions to our bilateral relations.
我们谨对他的逝世表示深切哀悼，向他的家属表达诚挚慰问。
We deeply mourn for him and extend sincere sympathies to his family.
问：11月24日，几内亚比绍举行总统选举，首轮投票初步结果已经产生，12月29日将举行第二轮投票。
Presidential elections were held in Guinea-Bissau on November 24. Initial results of first round voting have come out and the second round will be held on December 29.
答：中方注意到，近日几内亚比绍顺利举行总统选举首轮投票，几位主要候选人均已表示接受选举初步结果。
We noted the first round of voting for Guinea-Bissau's presidential elections was held smoothly. Major candidates have all accepted the initial results.
作为几内亚比绍的好朋友，中方期待第二轮选举顺利举行，并愿继续同国际社会一道，为几内亚比绍实现稳定和发展提供力所能及的帮助。
As a good friend of Guinea-Bissau, China hopes the second round of voting will proceed smoothly, too. We would like to continue working with the international community to help Guinea-Bissau achieve stability and development.
问：有中国官方媒体表示，中方正考虑禁止起草涉港法案的美国议员入境中国，包括香港和澳门地区。
A Chinese state media said China is considering barring all US lawmakers who drafted the Hong Kong-related Act from entering China including Hong Kong and Macao.
请问中方是否在考虑这样做？
Is that an option you are considering?
答：你经常来，应该知道我们一般不对媒体、智库、专家、学者的报道和评论作具体的回应。
You are a frequent member at our press conference. I believe you are aware that we usually don't respond to specific reports and comments from the media, think-tanks, experts and scholars.
我可以告诉你的是，签证问题是一国的主权。
What I can tell you is that visa issuance is a sovereign right.
中国政府当然有权决定允许谁入境，不允许谁入境。
The Chinese government has every right to grant or deny entry.
那些不受欢迎的人自然不会被允许入境。
Surely those unwelcome will not be permitted to enter our country.
问：中方今天发布了萨尔瓦多总统布克尔将访华的消息，你可否提供更多情况？
Today China announced the upcoming visit of President Bukele of El Salvador to China. Could you give us more details?
答：应国家主席习近平邀请，萨尔瓦多共和国总统布克尔将于12月1日至6日对中国进行国事访问。
Invited by President Xi Jinping, President Bukele of El Salvador will pay a state visit to China from December 1 to 6.
访问期间，习近平主席将为布克尔总统举行欢迎仪式和欢迎宴会。
During his visit, President Xi will hold a welcoming ceremony and a welcoming banquet for him.
两国元首将举行会谈并共同出席合作文件签字仪式。
The two presidents will have talks and attend a signing ceremony.
李克强总理、栗战书委员长也将分别会见布克尔总统。
Premier Li Keqiang and NPC Chairman Li Zhanshu will also meet with President Bukele respectively.
除北京外，布克尔总统还将访问上海。
Besides Beijing, President Bukele will also visit Shanghai.
中萨建交一年多来，两国各领域交流合作快速展开，成果持续显现，增进了两国人民的福祉。
During the past year or so after China and El Salvador established diplomatic ties, we have had rapid growth in exchange and cooperation with fruitful outcomes that benefit both peoples.
中方高度重视中萨关系，期待同布克尔总统领导的新政府一道，在相互尊重、平等相待、合作共赢和互不干涉内政原则基础上，加强各领域交流合作，不断造福两国人民。
China attached high importance to our bilateral relations with El Salvador. We expect to work with the new government led by President Bukele, step up exchange and collaboration in various areas with mutual respect, equal treatment, win-win cooperation and non-interference in each other's internal affairs.
我们相信布克尔总统此次访问将取得丰硕成果，为中萨关系持续健康稳定发展注入新的强劲动力。
We believe President Bukele's visit will yield bountiful outcomes that will inject new, strong impetus into the consistent, sound and stable growth of our bilateral relations.
因日程安排原因，12月2日（星期一）外交部例行记者会提前至14:30举行，地点不变。
Due to scheduling reasons, the MFA regular press conference on Monday, December 2 will begin earlier at 2:30pm in the same venue.
2019年11月28日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on November 28, 2019
应韩国外交部长官康京和邀请，国务委员兼外交部长王毅将于12月4日至5日访问韩国。
At the invitation of ROK Foreign Minister Kang Kyung-wha, State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi will visit the ROK from December 4 to 5.
中韩互为重要近邻和合作伙伴，当前两国关系保持良好发展势头，双方在国际地区问题上保持密切协调合作。
China and the ROK are important close neighbors and cooperative partners. Bilateral relations are growing with a sound momentum with close coordination and cooperation on international and regional issues.
访问期间，王毅国务委员将会见韩国领导人，同康京和外长举行会谈，双方将就双边关系和共同关心的问题深入交换意见。
During the visit, State Councilor Wang will meet with ROK leaders and hold talks with Foreign Minister Kang to exchange in-depth views on bilateral relations and issues of mutual concern.
问：美国总统特朗普27日签署“香港人权与民主法案”。
US President Trump signed the Hong Kong Human Rights and Democracy Act on November 27.
中方对此有何评论？
Could you comment on that?
答：美方将所谓“香港人权与民主法案”签署成法，此举严重干预香港事务，严重干涉中国内政，严重违反国际法和国际关系基本准则，是赤裸裸的霸权行径，中国政府和中国人民坚决反对。
The US side has signed into law the so-called Hong Kong Human Rights and Democracy Act. This is a severe interference in Hong Kong affairs, which are China's internal affairs. It is also in serious violation of international law and basic norms governing international relations. The Chinese government and people firmly oppose such stark hegemonic acts.
香港回归祖国以来，“一国两制”取得举世公认的成功，香港居民依法享有前所未有的民主权利。
Since Hong Kong's return to the motherland, success of the "one country, two systems" principle has been universally recognized. Hong Kong residents enjoy unprecedented democratic rights in accordance with law.
美方罔顾事实、颠倒黑白，公然为疯狂打砸烧、残害无辜市民、践踏法治、危害社会秩序的暴力犯罪分子撑腰打气，性质极其恶劣，用心十分险恶，其根本目的是破坏香港繁荣稳定，破坏“一国两制”伟大实践，破坏中华民族实现伟大复兴的历史进程。
The US has been disregarding facts and distorting truth. It openly backed violent criminals who rampantly smashed facilities, set fire, assaulted innocent civilians, trampled on the rule of law, and jeopardized social order. The egregious and malicious nature of its intentions is fully revealed. Its very aim is to undermine Hong Kong's stability and prosperity, sabotage the practice of "one country, two systems", and disrupt the Chinese nation's endeavor to realize the great renewal.
我们要正告美方，香港是中国的香港，香港事务纯属中国内政，任何外国政府和势力都无权干预。
We remind the US that Hong Kong is part of China and Hong Kong affairs are China's internal affairs where no foreign government or force shall interfere.
这一所谓法案只会让包括香港同胞在内的广大中国人民进一步认清美国的险恶用心和霸权本质，只会让中国人民更加众志成城。
This Act will only further expose the malicious and hegemonic nature of US intentions to the Chinese people, including our Hong Kong compatriots. And the Chinese people will only stand in greater solidarity.
美方的图谋注定失败。
The US attempts are bound to fail.
中国政府反对任何外部势力干预香港事务的决心坚定不移，贯彻“一国两制”方针的决心坚定不移，维护国家主权、安全、发展利益的决心坚定不移。
The Chinese government is determined in opposing foreign interference in Hong Kong affairs. We are determined in implementing the "one country, two systems" principle and safeguarding national sovereignty, security and development interests.
我们奉劝美方不要一意孤行，否则中方必将予以坚决反制，由此产生的一切后果必须由美方承担。
We urge the US to not continue going down the wrong path, or China will take countermeasures, and the US must bear all consequences.
问：美方将“香港人权与民主法案”签署成法，是否会影响中美经贸磋商？
Will the US signing of the Hong Kong Human Rights and Democracy Act affect the China-US trade talks?
答：我刚才说过了，中国政府和中国人民坚决反对美方将所谓“香港人权与民主法案”签署成法。
Like I said, the Chinese government and people firmly oppose the signing of the Hong Kong Human Rights and Democracy Act into law.
中方强烈敦促美方不得实施该法，以免影响中美关系和两国在重要领域的合作。
We strongly urge the US to not implement this Act so as to avoid negative effects on China-US relations and cooperation in important areas.
问：据报道，欧洲议会27日通过了由冯德莱恩担任主席的新一届欧盟委员会名单。
The European Parliament passed a list of new European Commissioners headed by Ursula von der Leyen on November 27.
新一届欧委会将于12月1日就职。
The new commission will get to work on December 1.
中方对此有何评论？对新一届欧委会有何期待？
I wonder if China would like to comment on this? Also, what are you expecting from the new commission?
答：我们注意到欧洲议会通过了新一届欧盟委员会名单。
We note that the European Parliament has passed the list of new European Commissioners.
中国政府一贯高度重视发展同欧盟的关系，重视欧盟委员会的地位和作用。
The Chinese government attaches high importance to relations with the EU and the Commission's stature and role.
中方始终支持欧洲一体化进程，希望欧盟保持团结、稳定、开放、繁荣。
We support European integration and hope to see a united, stable, open and prosperous EU.
中国和欧盟是世界两大重要经济体和两大稳定力量。
China and the EU stand as two major economies and sources for stability in the world.
当前形势下，彼此间保持开放包容，持续扩大合作，不仅符合双方利益，也有利于为世界注入更多的稳定性和正能量。
Under current circumstances, staying open, inclusive to each other and expanding cooperation not only serves both sides' interests, but also brings greater stability and positive energy to the world.
我们希望欧方同中方一道，在尊重彼此核心利益和重大关切的基础上，本着相互尊重、互利共赢的精神，深化互信，扩大合作，妥处分歧，推动中欧全面战略伙伴关系不断迈上新台阶，让中欧合作的成果更好地惠及双方人民。
We hope the EU will work with China, with respect for each other's core interests and concerns as well as the win-win spirit, to bring our comprehensive strategic partnership to a new height and to bring more benefits to our peoples.
问：美方将“香港人权与民主法案”签署成法，中方表示将对美方进行坚决反制，你能否介绍更多细节？反制措施是立即出台，还是要酝酿一段时间？
The Chinese side said there would be strong countermeasures on the US signing the Hong Kong Human Rights and Democracy Act into law. I was wondering if you could give us more details on this? Is this immediate or far?
答：中国政府和中国人民坚决反对美方将所谓“香港人权与民主法案”签署成法。
The Chinese government and people firmly oppose the signing of the Hong Kong Human Rights and Democracy Act into law.
此举严重干预香港事务，严重干涉中国内政，严重违反国际法和国际关系基本准则，是赤裸裸的霸权行径。
This is a severe interference in Hong Kong affairs, which are China's internal affairs. As a stark hegemonic practice, it is also in serious violation of international law and basic norms governing international relations.
问：有媒体近日披露，巴拿马前总统巴雷拉2017年曾收受中国政府大量援助以换取中巴建交。
Recent media reports claimed that in 2017, Panama's then president Varela received large amounts of assistance from the Chinese government in exchange for establishing ties with China.
台湾方面称，大陆一贯以援助手段诱使贪腐政客将个人利益置于国家之上。
Taiwan said that the mainland often uses assistance to lure corrupt officials to put personal gains before national interests.
中方有何评论？
Could you comment on that?
答：中国和巴拿马在一个中国原则基础上建立外交关系，完全符合国际法和国际关系基本准则，是大势所趋、人心所向。
China and Panama established diplomatic relationship on the basis of the one-China principle, which is consistent with international law and basic norms governing international relations. It is in keeping with the trend of the times and people's aspirations.
去年，巴拿马政府公开了同中方签署的包括《中巴建交联合公报》在内的26份协议全文，充分表明两国建交光明磊落、公开透明。
Last year, the Panama government published the full text of 26 agreements signed with China, including the Joint Communique on the Establishment of Diplomatic Relations between China and Panama. It fully shows that the whole process was open and transparent and the two sides have nothing to hide.
巴方也多次重申，巴中建交是政治决断，完全基于一个中国的政治原则。
The Panama side also stated on many occasions that establishing relations with China was a political decision entirely based on the one-China principle.
建交后，中方为巴拿马经济社会发展提供了力所能及的帮助，支持巴方建设了阿玛多尔会展中心、科隆平安城市等项目，这些项目都着眼于造福巴拿马人民，不是给予哪个政党或者哪个人的好处，不存在任何利益输送和私下交易。
Since relations were established, China has provided assistance to Panama's socioeconomic development to the best of our capabilities. We offered support to projects such as the Amador Convention Center and the Colon Secure City project. They are designed to benefit the Panama people, not any political party or individual. There is no secret funneling of funds or backdoor dealing of any kind.
真正搞“金援外交”和利益输送的恰恰是台湾当局。
It is the Taiwan authority that engages in dollar diplomacy and interests transmission.
台湾当局“以援助换外交”的有关说法完全是无中生有，自欺欺人，不过是在以己之心，度人之腹。
Its allegation of "assistance for diplomacy", presuming others by Taiwan's own pattern, is pure fabrication to console itself and to fool others.
问：据报道，教皇方济各从日本返回梵蒂冈途中表示，“我真的很想去北京。我爱中国。”
Pope Francis reportedly said on his way back to the Vatican City State from Japan that he loves China and would like to go to Beijing.
中方对此有何回应？是否将邀请其访华？
I wonder what your response might be and will you invite the Pope to visit China?
答：我们看到有关报道，对教皇表达的友好和善意表示赞赏。
We saw the reports and appreciate the Pope's friendliness and good will.
中梵之间保持良好沟通，我们对中梵关系改善取得进展感到高兴。
China and the Vatican City State have good communication, and we are pleased with the improvement in our relations.
中方对推进中梵关系是真诚和积极的，对双方开展交往是开放和欢迎的。
China is sincere and positive in advancing China-Vatican relationship. We welcome and are open to exchange between the two countries.
法国外交部周三批评中方在新疆对待少数民族的做法，呼吁中方停止大规模拘禁行为。
The French Foreign Ministry on Wednesday criticized China's treatment of minorities in Xinjiang, and called on China to put an end to mass detentions in the region.
你对此有何评论？德国总理默克尔在德国联邦议院发表演讲时也批评了中国的治疆政策，并对香港区议会选举结果表示赞赏。
Do you have any response to this? On a related note, in a speech to German lawmakers, German Chancellor Angela Merkel also condemned China's policy in Xinjiang, and she praised the result of the district council election in Hong Kong.
中方对此有何评论？
Do you have any response to that as well?
答：你提到的一个是涉疆问题、一个是涉港问题。我分别回答你。
Your questions are about Xinjiang and Hong Kong. I'll answer them one by one.
关于涉疆问题，中方已经多次介绍了有关情况和立场。
Regarding Xinjiang, we have provided information and stated our position repeatedly.
1990年至2016年底，新疆发生了数千起暴恐事件，造成大量无辜人员伤亡和财产损失。
From 1990 to 2016, Xinjiang witnessed thousands of violent and terrorist attacks, which caused massive casualties and property loss.
新疆地方政府采取反恐和去极端化措施光明正大，无可非议。
Against such a backdrop, the government in Xinjiang took counter-terrorism and de-radicalization measures, which is totally aboveboard and beyond reproach.
去年底以来，已有上千名外国使节、国际组织官员、媒体人士先后到新疆参访，他们亲眼看到了新疆预防性反恐和去极端化措施所取得的显著成效。
Since the end of last year, over 1,000 foreign diplomats, international organization officials and media personnel have visited Xinjiang and got the first-hand knowledge of the effective measures on preventive counter-terrorism and de-radicalization taken there.
这里我要强调，新疆事务纯属中国内政。
I stress that Xinjiang affairs are China's internal affairs.
我们坚决反对任何人、任何势力借涉疆问题干涉中国内政。
We oppose the interference in China's internal affairs by anyone or any force under the pretext of Xinjiang-related issues.
关于你提到的第二个问题，也就是德方在涉港问题上的一些言论，这里我要指出的是，香港是中国的香港，香港事务纯属中国内政。
On the German remarks about Hong Kong, which is your second question, I want to point out that Hong Kong is part of China and Hong Kong affairs are China's internal affairs.
问：中方何时对美签署“香港人权与民主法案”采取反制措施？实施反制措施的时机和中美经贸磋商有关吗？
When would China launch the countermeasures to the US signing of the Hong Kong Human Rights and Democracy Act? Does its timing have something to do with the trade talks?
答：我刚才已经说过了，我们坚决反对美方将所谓“香港人权与民主法案”签署成法，我们强烈敦促美方不得实施该法，以免影响中美关系和两国在重要领域的合作。
Like I said, we firmly oppose the signing of the Hong Kong Human Rights and Democracy Act into law. We strongly urge the US to not implement this Act so as to avoid negative effects on China-US relations and cooperation in important areas.
至于你关心的中方反制措施有哪些、何时出台，请你保持关注，该来的早晚会来。
Please stay tuned to see what our counter-measures will be and when they will be rolled out. What should come, will come.
追问：听起来中方似乎需要观察美方如何实施该法案，然后再做决定，是这样吗？
Follow-up: So it sounds like China is going to watch how the US implements the law and then decide whether to take counter-measures. Is that correct?
这是你的解读。
That's just your interpretation.
我刚才说的是，我们敦促美方不得将该法付诸实施，以免对中美关系和两国在重要领域的合作造成影响。
We urge the US to not implement this Act so as to avoid negative effects on China-US relations and cooperation in important areas.
至于你非常关心的反制措施，既然你这么关心，就请保持关注，该来的早晚会来。
As for our counter-measures that you are so interested in, please stay tuned. What should come, will come.
问：你刚刚发布了王毅国务委员将访问韩国的消息。
You just announced State Councilor Wang Yi's upcoming visit to the ROK.
请问王毅国务委员访问期间是否会同韩方讨论习近平主席访韩的问题？
Will he discuss President Xi's visit to the ROK with the Korean side?
答：我刚才已经介绍过了，王毅国务委员访问韩国期间，将会见韩国领导人，同康京和外长举行会谈，双方将就双边关系和共同关心的问题深入交换意见。
As I announced, during the visit, State Councilor Wang will meet with ROK leaders and hold talks with Foreign Minister Kang to exchange in-depth views on bilateral relations and issues of mutual concern.
至于你关心的习近平主席访问韩国的问题，我可以告诉你的是，中韩作为近邻，一直保持着密切高层互访和政治外交沟通。
Regarding President Xi's visit to the ROK, as close neighbors, China and the ROK keep close exchange of high-level visits and communication in diplomatic and political fields.
如果有这方面的消息，我们会及时发布。
We will update you if we have the information you are interested in.
2019年11月27日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on November 27, 2019
问：据报道，菲律宾反对派议员称，中国一家国企持有菲国家电网公司大量股份，造成中方有能力控制菲律宾供电网，威胁菲国家安全。
An opposition Senator said that a Chinese state-owned company has a lot of stake in the Philippines' National Transmission Corporation (Transco). It makes China capable of controlling the Philippines' power grid, which is a threat to the country's national security.
答：据我所知，中国国家电网公司作为菲律宾企业合作伙伴参与菲国家电网公司项目，为菲民众提供安全、高效、优质的电力服务。
To my knowledge, the State Grid Corporation of China took part in the Transco project as a cooperation partner, providing safe, efficient and high-quality electricity services.
目前，项目由菲方负责运营、管理和维护，中方企业应菲方要求提供技术支持。
The project is now operated, managed and maintained by the Philippine side, with the Chinese partner offering necessary technical support upon request.
所谓中方控制菲电网、威胁菲国家安全完全是无稽之谈。
The allegation of China's control over the Philippines' power grid or threat to the country's national security is completely groundless.
中方企业还积极履行社会责任，在菲偏远地区开展“光明乡村”扶贫通电项目，受到当地政府和百姓欢迎。
Besides, the Chinese business also actively fulfills its social responsibilities. The "Brighten Up" project that brings electricity to remote areas in the Philippines has been applauded by local authorities and people.
菲律宾是中国的友好近邻和重要伙伴，中方支持中国企业合法依规在菲开展务实合作，扩大互利共赢。
The Philippines is China's close and friendly neighbor as well as an important partner. We support Chinese businesses' pursuit of practical, win-win cooperation in the Philippines in accordance with laws and regulations.
希望菲国内个别人士能以开放的心态和客观公正的态度对待中菲合作，不必杞人忧天，更不要无中生有。
We hope certain individuals in the Philippines will look at cooperation with China in an open, objective and impartial manner. There is no need to worry about the sky falling or imagine trouble where there is none.
问：据报道，美国国务卿蓬佩奥26日表示，近日涉疆的报道表明新疆存在非常严重侵犯人权的行为，呼吁中国政府释放所有被任意拘留者，还表示其他少数民族也感受到了压制。
US Secretary of State Pompeo said on November 26 that recent reports on Xinjiang show gross human rights violations there. It's not just Muslims but other minority groups that have also felt the repression. He called on the Chinese government to release all those who are arbitrarily detained.
答：美方有关人士的陈词滥调充满了政治偏见与谎言，再次暴露了他在反恐和去极端化问题上的双重标准，也让我们看清了他借涉疆问题干涉中国内政的险恶用心。
Those remarks from the US side are once again full of political prejudice and lies, revealing for another time his double standards on counter-terrorism and de-radicalization as well as his malicious intention to interfere in China's internal affairs under the pretext of Xinjiang-related issues.
这里我要强调：
Here are some points I'd like to emphasize.
第一，新疆不存在民族、宗教、人权问题，新疆地方政府采取的是反恐和去极端化措施。
First, there are no so-called "issues" related to ethnicity, religion or human rights in Xinjiang. The local government's efforts are in fact on counter-terrorism and de-radicalization.
1990年至2016年底，新疆发生了数千起暴恐事件，造成大量无辜人员伤亡和财产损失。
From 1990 to 2016, thousands of violent and terrorist incidents occurred in Xinjiang, which caused heavy casualties and property losses.
自从新疆方面依法严厉打击暴力恐怖犯罪、重视开展源头治理以来，当地已连续3年没有发生暴恐事件，社会稳定，民族团结，百姓安居乐业。
Under such circumstances, Xinjiang lawfully fought violent and terrorist crimes while addressing the root causes, and it hasn't seen a single violent, terrorist incident over the past three years. The region now enjoys stability, ethnic solidarity and its people live a happy life.
如果按照某些人的逻辑，难道新疆人民就应该反对这样的积极举措，宁肯生活在极端思想和暴恐行为的阴影中吗？
Faced with such plain facts, do certain people still think residents in Xinjiang should reject our positive measures and live in the shadows of extremism, violence and terrorism instead?
第二，中国政府依法保护包括新疆维吾尔族等各少数民族在内的中国公民宗教信仰自由。
Second, the Chinese government protects the freedom of religious belief of all Chinese nationals, including Xinjiang Uyghurs and other ethnic minorities.
中国各类信教群众近2亿人，其中2000多万人是穆斯林，宗教教职人员38万余人，宗教团体约5500个，依法登记的宗教活动场所14万多处。
There are nearly 200 million religious believers in China. Among them are more than 20 million Muslims and over 380 thousand clerics. There are approximately 5,500 religious groups and over 140,000 places of worship registered for religious activities.
新疆现有清真寺2.44万座，平均每530位穆斯林就拥有一座清真寺。
In Xinjiang, there are 24,400 mosques, which means there is a mosque for every 530 Muslims on average.
这些信息都可以在中国政府自2015年以来发布的7本涉及新疆的白皮书中找到。
Those are all facts that you can find in the seven white papers on Xinjiang published since 2015 by the Chinese government.
很显然，美国个别人缺的不是了解信息的手段和方法，而是承认事实的良知和勇气。
Apparently what some people in the US lack is not means to get the correct information, but the courage and conscience to admit the truth.
第三，中方始终欢迎秉持客观公正原则的外国人士到新疆走一走、看一看。
Third, China welcomes foreigners with an objective and fair mind to visit Xinjiang.
去年底以来，已有上千名外国使节、国际组织官员、媒体人士先后到新疆参访，他们亲眼看到了新疆预防性反恐和去极端化措施所取得的显著成效。
Since the end of last year, thousands of foreign diplomats, international organization officials and media personnel have visited Xinjiang and seen with their own eyes the remarkable achievements in preventive counter-terrorism and de-radicalization.
同时我要强调，新疆事务纯属中国内政，不容任何外部反华势力指手画脚。
In the meantime I must emphasize that Xinjiang affairs are China's internal affairs that allow no foreign interference.
最后我要再次强调，我们会继续坚持办好自己的事情，贯彻落实好我们的治疆政策，继续把新疆发展好、建设好。
Finally, we will continue to handle our domestic affairs well. We will continue to implement our Xinjiang policy and ensure the region's sound development.
新疆持续保持繁荣稳定、民族团结、社会和谐就是对那些诋毁抹黑言论最有力的回击。
The most powerful response to slanders is Xinjiang's lasting prosperity, stability, ethnic solidarity and social harmony.
问：据报道，今年7月有一名日本人在长沙被中国国家安全部门逮捕。
A Japanese national was reportedly arrested by Chinese national security authority in July this year in Changsha.
答：你提到这起案件的具体情况，目前我不了解。
I'm not aware of the specifics of this case.
如果你感兴趣的话，可以直接向主管部门询问。
I'd refer you to the competent authority if you are interested.
这里我可以告诉你的是，中方一向依法对涉嫌违反中国法律的外国公民进行处置，并会根据《中日领事协定》相关规定，为日方履行领事职务提供必要协助。
In China, foreign citizens suspected of violating Chinese law are always handled according to law. We also provide necessary assistance to the Japanese side for fulfilling its consular duties according to the Agreement on Consular Relations between China and Japan.
同时，我们也希望日方能够提醒本国公民尊重中国的法律法规，不得在华从事违法犯罪活动。
In the meantime, we hope Japan will remind its citizens to observe Chinese laws and regulations and do not conduct illegal activities in our territory.
追问：请问主管部门是哪个部门？
Follow-up: Which department is the competent authority you talked about?
主管部门就是主管国家安全的部门。
I referred to the department in charge of national security.
你刚才说了他被国家安全部门逮捕，你自己应该知道。
I believe you know which department that is since you said earlier yourself that the Japanese was arrested by the national security authority.
问：近期有关“中国干涉论”的报道在澳大利亚国内引起热议。
Reports on "Chinese interference" have recently triggered many discussions in Australia.
澳前总理陆克文称澳安全部门官员针对中国对澳干涉的言论系反应过度，“防范外国干涉”不应演变为非理性的反华政治迫害。
Former Prime Minister Kevin Rudd said that Australian security officials' comments on "Chinese interference" are overreaction, and that checking against the threat of foreign interference should not result in anti-Chinese domestic political witch-hunt.
中方对此有何评论？
I wonder if you have any comment on his remarks?
答：我看到了有关报道。
We noted relevant reports.
连日来，澳大利亚个别媒体和机构热衷炒作各种耸人听闻的“中国间谍案”、炮制各种充满偏见的“中国渗透论”，已经到了歇斯底里、草木皆兵的程度。
Certain Australian media and institutions have been creating and hyping up "Chinese espionage" and "Chinese infiltration" with all kinds of false exaggeration and bias.

They have reached a state of hysteria and extreme nervousness.
在这个时候，一些有识之士发出客观、理性的声音显得尤为重要。
In light of that, it is even more important that people with vision can make statements that are objective and rational.
这里我想强调几点：
I'd like to stress the following points.
一、中国一向秉持和平共处五项原则处理国与国关系，历来坚定奉行不干涉内政原则，主张各国根据自身国情选择发展道路。
First, China pursues the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence when developing state-to-state relations. We do not interfere in other countries' internal affairs, and we believe all countries should independently choose their own development path based on domestic conditions.
在这个问题上，中国说到做到、堂堂正正、光明磊落。
In this sense, China's practice is upright and aboveboard.
“干涉”的帽子绝对扣不到中国的头上。
No one can accuse us of any kind of "interference".
同时，中国坚定不移走中国特色社会主义道路，也坚决反对其他国家干涉中国内政。
In the meantime, China is committed to socialism with Chinese characteristics and opposed to foreign interference.
中国主张各国都公开声明承诺在任何情况下，不以任何理由干涉其他国家内政。
We encourage all countries to openly make commitments that they will not interfere in other countries' domestic affairs under whatever circumstance or excuse.
我们不知道澳大利亚方面是否能做到？
I wonder if Australia can actually make such commitment?
二、中方坚决反对澳方一些势力和人士肆意鼓噪炒作“中国干涉论”，无端指责抹黑中国。
Second, China opposes the behavior of certain Australian forces and people to smear China by rampantly hyping up "Chinese interference".
他们完全没有了解事实真相的意愿，对中方发布的权威消息置若罔闻，总是热衷炮制一些漏洞百出、荒唐至极的所谓“证据”。
They don't even have the readiness to know the facts or hear China's voice. What they are keen in is fabricating "evidence" that is ridiculously untrue and full of loopholes.
谎言重复一千遍依然是谎言，其结果只能成为一些反华势力利用的工具。
Lies repeated a thousand times are still lies. They will only be tools used by anti-China forces.
三、澳方一些人士出于政治目的和意识形态偏见，把中澳两国间经贸、文化、教育、科技等领域的正常交流合作政治化，把在澳华侨华人、中国留学生的正常活动和对祖（籍）国的真挚情感污名化，无端进行歪曲和打压，已经对中澳合作势头形成了干扰和损害。
Third, out of political agenda and ideological prejudice, some people in Australia have politicized economic, trade, cultural, educational, science and technology ties between China and Australia. They maliciously misinterpret and smear the normal activities and sincere sentiments of overseas Chinese in Australia, including Chinese students, while wantonly oppressing them.
这既不符合当代世界潮流，有悖社会公理和正义，也必将对澳自身国家形象和利益造成损害。
This has undermined the momentum for China-Australia cooperation. It is against the current trend of the world as well as social justice, and it damages Australia's own image and interests.
四、我们奉劝澳一些媒体尊重明确无误的事实真相，恪守起码的职业道德，放下意识形态偏见，不要再做不负责任、徒增笑柄的事情。
Fourth, we advise some Australian media to respect clear facts, have some basic professional ethics, reject ideological bias and refrain from doing anything irresponsible or absurd.
我们也希望澳政府多倾听理性客观的声音，及时发声澄清这些不实之词，为促进中澳之间的互信和合作多做一些“加法”。
We also hope the Australian government will heed the rational and objective voices, make clarifications on rumors at the earliest time possible, and make greater contributions to mutual trust and cooperation between China and Australia.
问：近日，有一个女孩在Tik Tok，也就是“抖音”国际版上传视频，在视频中她谈到新疆拘押维吾尔族人的问题。
Recently a teenage girl uploaded a video onto Tiktok, the international version of Douyin, where she talked about the internment of Uighurs in Xinjiang. Her account was suspended but the video remains on the platform.
她的账户被封了，但网络平台上还存有这段视频，因为她所在的国家没有相关机构对互联网内容进行监管。中方对此有何评论？
Does China have any particular views on the fact that this video remains on the platform given that the country does not have a cyberspace administration to regulate the contents available on the Internet?
答：你说的这个情况我不了解。
I'm not aware of that.
某一个人账户里面的情况，我怎么会了解？
How can I know the details of a personal online account?
我能告诉你的是，中国政府一贯要求中国企业在遵守国际规则和当地法律法规的基础上，开展对外经贸合作，同时我们也希望有关国家能够为中国企业在当地正常的经营合作提供一个公平、公正、非歧视的环境，这是我们的一贯立场。
I can only tell you that the Chinese government asks our companies to observe international rules as well as local laws and regulations when doing business overseas. We also hope other countries will provide them a fair, just and non-discriminatory business environment as we consistently stated.
问：据报道，25日，美国驻德国大使格雷内尔发表声明称，中美无法在道德上相提并论。格还表示，把美国政府同中国共产党进行比较，这是对美国的侮辱，也是对中国民众的侮辱。
US Ambassador to Germany Grenell said in a statement on November 25 that "there is no moral equivalence between China and the US" and that equating the US government to the Communist Party of China is an insult to the US and Chinese citizens.
你对此有何评论？
Would you like to comment on this?
答：美国的一些政客和官员隔三差五就要出来叫一叫、跳一跳，抹黑攻击中国。他们的拙劣表演充分暴露出其不可告人的险恶用心和政治企图。
Every once in a while some US politicians or officials would jump on stage with a clumsy show to discredit China, which only exposes their malicious calculations and political agenda.
美国确实无法在道德层面同中国相提并论。
There indeed is no moral equivalence between China and the US.
在国际社会大家庭里，中国始终维护和平，促进发展，坚守道义，同各国携手构建人类命运共同体。
In the international community, China always upholds peace, development and justice while the self-centered US pursues selfish gains at the expense of others and walks away from commitments.
美国呢？损人利己，唯我独尊，背信弃义，在世界上大搞顺我者昌，逆我者亡。
Its motto seems to be that whoever stands with it shall prosper and whoever doesn't shall perish.
第一，中国始终是世界和平的建设者。
First, China upholds world peace.
中国坚持走和平发展道路，积极为维护世界和平稳定贡献智慧力量。
Committed to peaceful development, China contributes wisdom and efforts to maintaining world peace and stability.
截止去年底，中国累计派出联合国维和人员近4万人，成为安理会五常中派出维和人员最多的国家。
By the end of last year, China has contributed nearly 40,000 UN peace-keeping personnel, outnumbering other permanent members of the Security Council.
在国际关系中，中国坚持相互尊重、不干涉内政原则，推动各方通过对话协商解决朝鲜半岛、伊朗核、阿富汗、若开邦等热点问题，积极发挥建设性作用，日益成为世界和平的稳定之锚和信心之源。
In international relations, committed to the principle of mutual respect and non-interference in others' internal affairs, we play a constructive role in facilitating the resolution through dialogue and consultation of hotspots like the Korean Peninsula issue, the Iranian nuclear issue, the Afghanistan issue and the Rakhine State issue. With constructive efforts, China has increasingly become a source of stability and confidence for world peace.
反观美国，可谓是世界动荡不安的制造者。
What about the US? Well, it is a creator of unrest and turmoil.
在阿富汗、伊拉克、利比亚、叙利亚等国燃起战火，给当地百姓留下了无法弥合的伤痛。
The warfare it started in Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya and Syria has left the people there with wounds that will never heal.
赤裸裸干涉他国内政，在亚非地区遥控“阿拉伯之春”，在欧亚国家导演“颜色革命”，在世界各地搞“和平演变”，已经成为全球最大的不稳定因素。
Among its stark interference in other countries' internal affairs, the US pulled the strings for the "Arab Spring" in the Asian-African region, directed "color revolutions" in Eurasian countries, and hatched "peaceful evolutions" all over the world. It has become the world's top source of instability.
这样的美国，能和中国相提并论吗？
How can there be any equivalence between such a country and China?
第二，中国始终是全球发展的贡献者。
Second, China contributes to global development.
中国坚持对外开放，互利共赢，同世界分享中国发展的机遇。
Through opening-up and win-win cooperation, we share opportunities brought by domestic development with the rest of the world.
中国坚定维护以世界贸易组织为核心的多边贸易体制，致力于构建开放型世界经济。
China is a staunch defender of the WTO-centered multilateral trading regime and is committed to building an open world economy.
作为世界第二大经济体，中国对全球GDP增量的贡献率已连续10年高达34%。
As the world's second largest economy, China has been contributing as much as 34% to world GDP growth for ten consecutive years.
70年来，中国共向166个国家和国际组织提供近4000亿元人民币援助，为120多个发展中国家提供了力所能及的帮助。
Over the past 70 years, we have provided nearly 400 billion yuan in assistance to 166 countries and international organizations and helped more than 120 developing countries to the best of our capabilities.
共建“一带一路”倡议提出6年来，获得了国际社会的高度认同和积极响应，取得了一大批早期收获，已经成为当今世界最受欢迎的公共产品和规模最大的经济合作平台。
The Belt and Road Initiative proposed six years ago has received the recognition and active participation of the international community. With fruitful early harvests, it has become the world's most popular public good and largest platform for economic cooperation.
反观美国，可谓是霸凌行径的操弄者。处处奉行“美国优先”，只想占他国便宜。
What about the US? It is a complete bully. Holding high the banner of "America first", it is only thinking about taking advantage of others.
在与别国贸易往来中，一言不合就加征关税。
In trade with other countries, it raises tariffs whenever it pleases.
在国际金融体系中，滥用美元垄断地位，动不动就对他国实施单边制裁和长臂管辖。
In the international financial system, it abuses the monopoly status of the US dollar while imposing unilateral sanctions and long-arm jurisdiction at every turn.
还动用国家力量编造“莫须有”的罪名，打压特定国家和特定企业。
It even uses national power to oppress certain countries and businesses with trumped-up charges.
美国自己不愿意投入，却千方百计干扰破坏中国和其他国家开展合作。
While reluctant to invest in other countries, the US uses every means to sabotage their cooperation with China.
第三，中国始终是国际秩序的维护者。
Third, China upholds international order.
中国高举多边主义旗帜，坚定维护以联合国为核心的国际体系、以国际法为基础的国际秩序，推动构建人类命运共同体。
We champion multilateralism, defend the UN-centered international system and the international order based on international law, and endeavor to build a community with a shared future for mankind.
中国迄今参加了100多个政府间国际组织，签署了超过500个多边条约。
We have joined more than 100 inter-governmental international organizations and signed more than 500 multilateral treaties.
中国为推动《巴黎协定》的全面达成和有效落实作出了突出贡献。
China has made significant contributions to the conclusion and implementation of the Paris Agreement.
中国历来按时足额缴纳联合国会费，支持联合国为促进世界和平与发展发挥作用。
We always submit our UN contributions on time and in full to support its role in promoting peace and development.
中国积极推动落实联合国2030年可持续发展议程，在G20杭州峰会期间，首次将发展议题纳入全球宏观政策协调框架，得到了广大发展中国家的一致赞誉和好评。
We work actively towards the implementation of the UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The G20 Hangzhou Summit adds development to the global macro policy coordination framework for the first time, a move applauded by developing countries.
反观美国，可谓是全球治理的搅局者。
What about the US? It is a spoiler in global governance.
2017年以来，美国逃避应承担的责任义务，退出联合国教科文组织、联合国人权理事会、巴黎协定、伊核协议、中导条约等。
From 2017, walking away from its responsibilities and obligations, the US withdrew from UNESCO, the UNHRC, the Paris Agreement, the JCPOA and the INF Treaty. The list goes on.
美国国内侵犯人权的状况很普遍、很严重，却对他国人权状况说三道四，而且自己并不是联合国《儿童权利公约》、《消除对妇女一切形式歧视公约》等重要人权公约的缔约方。
Turning a blind eye to the prevalent and grave human rights violations at home, the US keeps criticizing other countries' human rights conditions, despite the fact that it is not party to important human rights instruments such as the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women.
美国派军舰到别国家门口耀武扬威，叫嚣南海航行自由，自己却没有加入《联合国海洋法公约》。
It sends warships to flex muscles at others' doorsteps in the name of freedom of navigation in the South China Sea despite the fact that it has not ratified the United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea.
美方长期拖欠联合国会费高达10.55亿美元，使联合国陷入财政危机，甚至还在今年联大期间宣称“自己是民族主义者”，公然批评全球化。
It has long been stalling payment of UN contributions to the amount of 1.055 billion US dollars, putting the UN into a financial crisis. During this year's UNGA, it even openly boasted nationalism and denounced globalization.
另外，我不得不说的是，格雷内尔先生试图挑拨中国共产党和中国人民的关系，极其阴险。
I need to point out that Mr. Grenell's attempt to drive a wedge between the Communist Party of China (CPC) and the Chinese people is deeply sinister.
新中国成立70年来，中国共产党带领中国人民实现了从站起来、富起来到强起来的历史性飞跃，受到全体中国人民的衷心拥护。
Since the People's Republic of China was founded 70 years ago, the CPC has led the Chinese people in making historic leaps from finding their feet to becoming prosperous and strong. The CPC has the full support of the Chinese people.
根据美国民调机构的调查结果，中国民众对政府的信任度全球第一。
According to US poll results, Chinese people's trust in their government ranks top in the world.
人心是最好的口碑。
People's endorsement speaks volumes.
任何妄图否定中国的社会主义制度、挑拨中国共产党和中国人民关系的政治图谋都注定不会得逞！
Failure is the only end for any political attempt to negate China's socialist system and drive a wedge between the CPC and the Chinese people.
最后，我要奉劝格雷内尔先生和美国一些政客，人贵有自知之明，请他还是趁早反省一下美国自身的问题，放弃偏见和执念，停止喋喋不休的反华聒噪。
Lastly, here is my advice to Mr. Grenell and some other American politicians: know yourself. You really need to devote more efforts in solving America's problems at home and give up bias, stubbornness and anti-China gibberish.
还是我们经常说的那句话，请美方不要高估自己的造谣能力，也不要低估别人的判断能力。
Like we always say, don't overestimate your rumors or underestimate others' judgment.
谎言重复一千遍，依然还是谎言。
Lies, though repeated a thousand times, are still lies.
2019年11月26日外交部发言人耿爽答记者问
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Remarks on November 26, 2019
问：据报道，美国“国会—行政部门中国委员会”（CECC）呼吁美总统签署“香港人权与民主法案”，以表明美与香港人民站在一起。
We've seen reports that the US Congressional-Executive Commission on China (CECC) called on the President to sign into law the Hong Kong Human Rights and Democracy Act to demonstrate that the US stands in solidarity with the Hong Kong people.
针对香港区议会选举，美国会众议长佩洛西、议员鲁比欧、加德纳、沃伦等也发推特对选举结果表示支持。
House Speaker Pelosi and Congress members including Rubio, Gardner and Warren also tweeted their support for the result of district council elections in Hong Kong.
你对此有何评论？
I wonder if you'd like to make a comment?
答：这两天我们已多次表明中方立场。
We have stated China's position repeatedly over the past few days.
中方强烈谴责并坚决反对美国国会通过“香港人权与民主法案”，已就此向美方提出了严正交涉。
China condemns and strongly opposes the US Congress passing the Hong Kong Human Rights and Democracy Act, for which we lodged stern representations with the US side.
我们强烈敦促美方认清形势，悬崖勒马，立即采取措施阻止该案成法，停止任何插手香港事务、干涉中国内政的言行。
We urge the US to grasp the situation and step back from the edge of the cliff. It should take immediate measures to prevent the bill from becoming law and stop interfering in Hong Kong affairs, which are China's internal affairs.
如果美方一意孤行，中方必将采取有力措施予以坚决反制。
If the US side insists on going down the wrong path, China will take strong countermeasures.
我要再次强调，止暴制乱、恢复秩序是香港当前最紧迫的任务。
I stress once again that the most pressing task for Hong Kong at the moment is ending violence and restoring order.
香港是中国的香港，香港事务纯属中国内政。
Hong Kong is part of China, and its affairs are China's domestic affairs.
中国政府维护国家主权、安全、发展利益的决心坚定不移，贯彻“一国两制”方针的决心坚定不移，反对任何外部势力干涉香港事务的决心坚定不移。
The Chinese government is determined in safeguarding national sovereignty, security and development interests. We are determined in implementing the "one country, two systems" principle and opposing foreign interference.
美国的一些议员放着自己国内的一堆问题不去解决，不好好为自己的选民服务，却对别国事务格外关心、说三道四，自诩为教师爷和卫道士，想出风头、博眼球，进行自我炒作，这是投机政客的典型表现，不仅对不起美国选民的选票，也已经引起了国际社会的普遍反感。
Certain members of the US Congress seem to be over-zealous about commenting on other countries' affairs while leaving piles of domestic issues unattended and their voters underserved. They style themselves as "mentors" and "guardians" to catch attention with uninvited remarks. This kind of hype-up is typical speculation by politicians. They are not only failing domestic voters but also triggering international aversion.
我们奉劝这些议员别再浪费美国纳税人的钱，无事生非。
We advise them to stop wasting taxpayers' money on making trouble out of nothing.
问：据报道，针对国际调查记者协会（ICIJ）涉疆调查的报道，美国“国会—行政部门中国委员会”（CECC）称有关报道揭露了新疆“拘留营”的情况，国际社会应对此问责。
In response to ICIJ reports on Xinjiang, the US Congressional-Executive Commission on China said that the international community should demand accountability for the "internment camps" in Xinjiang.
此外，德国、英国外交部门敦促中国允许联合国官员访问新疆。
The German Federal Foreign Office and the British Foreign and Commonwealth Office urged China to give UN officials access to Xinjiang.
欧盟委员会发表声明，反对新疆设立“再教育营”、广泛监视和限制宗教信仰自由。
The European Commission said in a statement that it opposes "reeducation camps", widespread surveillance and restrictions of freedom of religion or belief in Xinjiang.
答：一段时间以来，西方一些媒体在涉疆问题上以造谣为乐，个别国家和政客以蹭热点为荣。
Some Western media have been enthusiastic in making rumors about Xinjiang, and certain politicians in some countries have been enjoying the pleasure of accusing China whenever there's hotspot news at hand.
这些抹黑造谣、污蔑指责的行为让我们看清了他们在反恐和去极端化问题上采取的双重标准，也让我们看清了他们借涉疆问题干涉中国内政的险恶用心。
Those behaviors show clearly how they play double standards on counter-terrorism and de-radicalization issues, and how vicious their intentions are when using Xinjiang-related issues to interfere in China's internal affairs.
在此我要强调：
Here I'd like to stress the following points.
第一，新疆不存在民族、宗教、人权问题，这些西方媒体指责攻击的是新疆地方政府采取的反恐和去极端化措施。
First, there are no so-called "issues" related to ethnicity, religion or human rights in Xinjiang. What the Western media accuse are in fact local government's efforts in counter-terrorism and de-radicalization.
如果按某些人的逻辑，难道新疆人民就应该反对这样的积极举措，宁肯生活在极端思想和暴恐行为的阴影中吗？
Is it certain people's belief that residents in Xinjiang should oppose our positive measures and live in the shadows of extremism, violence and terrorism instead?
这些信息都可以在中国政府自2015年以来发布的7本涉及新疆的白皮书中找到。
Those are all facts that you can find in the seven white papers on Xinjiang published since 2015.
很显然，西方一些人缺的不是了解信息的方法和途径，而是承认事实的良知和勇气。
Apparently what some people in Western countries lack is not means to get the correct information, but the courage and conscience to admit the truth.
去年底以来，已有上千名外国使节、国际组织官员、媒体人士先后访问新疆，他们亲眼看到了新疆预防性反恐和去极端化措施所取得的显著成效。
Since the end of last year, thousands of foreign diplomats, international organization officials and media personnel have visited Xinjiang and seen with their own eyes the remarkable achievements in preventive counter-terrorism and de-radicalization.
中方也已向联合国人权高专和高专办人员发出了访华及访疆邀请。
China also extended invitations to the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights and her office for visiting Xinjiang and other places in China.
但同时我要强调，新疆事务纯属中国内政。我们不允许外部势力借访问新疆、借涉疆问题干涉中国内政。
But in the meantime I must emphasize that Xinjiang affairs are China's internal affairs that allow no foreign interference under the pretext of access to Xinjiang or other Xinjiang-related issues.
新疆持续保持繁荣稳定、民族团结、社会和谐就是对个别媒体和个别人最有力的回击。
The most powerful response to certain media and individuals is Xinjiang's lasting prosperity, stability, ethnic solidarity and social harmony.
我们奉劝西方个别媒体和人士，与其挖空心思使用卑劣手段炒作涉疆问题，裁剪编造新疆的谣言和谎言，不如趁早放弃固有偏见和执念，真正为加深本国民众对新疆的了解作出努力。
Here is some advice to certain Western media and people: instead of hyping up Xinjiang-related issues with despicable lies, why don't you give up bias and do some real things to help your people know more about Xinjiang?
问：据报道，23日，伊朗外交部发言人穆萨维称，伊核问题全面协议联合委员会会议将于12月6日举行，地点可能定在维也纳。
According to reports, Iranian Foreign Ministry spokesperson Mousavi said on November 23 that the Joint Commission of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) will hold a meeting on December 6 and the venue might be Vienna.
中方哪位官员将出席会议？对会议有何期待？
Who from the Chinese side will attend this meeting and what do you expect from it?
答：伊朗核问题形势发展正处于关键阶段。
The Iranian nuclear issue has come to a critical stage.
中方就维护和落实全面协议问题与其他各方保持着密切沟通，不会缺席本次联委会会议。
China maintains close communication with other parties to the JCPOA on upholding and implementing the deal. We will attend the upcoming Joint Commission meeting.
中方始终认为，完整、有效执行全面协议是缓解伊核紧张局势的唯一现实有效途径。
China holds that full and effective implementation of the JCPOA is the only viable way to ease tensions over the Iranian nuclear issue.
我们期待各方通过本次会议巩固维护全面协议的政治共识，协商解决协议执行相关问题，探讨落实全面协议的有效途径，特别是恢复各方权利和义务平衡的问题。
We hope this meeting will help all parties consolidate the political consensus of upholding the JCPOA, work out fulfillment issues through consultation, and explore effective means of implementation, in particular with regards to restoring the balance of rights and obligations of all parties.
2019年11月25日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on November 25, 2019
问：据报道，11月27日至28日，中国国际问题研究院将在北京举办中东安全论坛，你能否介绍有关情况？请问中方如何看待当前中东局势？为何在此时举办这一论坛？
China Institute of International Studies will hold the Middle East Security Forum in Beijing from November 27 to 28. Can you tell us more about it?
答：当前，中东地区很不太平。
Also, can you tell us how China views the current situation in the Middle East and why you choose this timing to hold this forum?
海湾局势持续紧张，热点问题快速演变，多国政局动荡难平，地区混乱给恐怖势力卷土重来提供了可乘之机，并造成严重外溢影响。
The Middle East today is yet to be a peaceful place. With tensions in the Gulf region, rapid evolvement of hotspots and political disturbances in many countries, chaos in this region is giving a chance to the resurgence of terrorism and producing serious spillover effects.
中方高度重视中东和平与安全。
China highly values peace and security in the Middle East.
去年7月，习近平主席在中国—阿拉伯国家合作论坛第八届部长级会议开幕式讲话中提出加强中阿安全对话协商，王毅国务委员兼外长在部长级会议上宣布中方考虑设立“中东安全论坛”。
In July last year, President Xi proposed more dialogue and consultation on security between China and Arab states in his speech at the opening ceremony of the Eighth Ministerial Conference of the China-Arab States Cooperation Forum. In the same ministerial conference, State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi announced China's decision to set up a Middle East security forum.
举办本次论坛，旨在落实习近平主席讲话重要精神。
The forum we are holding this time is aimed at implementing President Xi's vision.
王毅国务委员兼外长将集体会见重要与会嘉宾，外交部部长助理陈晓东将在开幕式上发表主旨演讲，重要与会嘉宾也将致辞。
State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi will have a group meeting with special guests. Assistant Foreign Minister Chen Xiaodong will deliver a keynote speech at the opening ceremony, and our special guests will also deliver remarks.
来自中东及域外有关国家的外交、安全领域官员、学者及中国外交部、国防部等单位代表、部分中国前驻外使节、智库专家等近200人，将围绕地区公平正义、多边主义、发展促安全、文明对话等议题进行研讨。
There will be almost 200 representatives attending the forum, including foreign officials and scholars in diplomatic and security fields from the Middle East and other countries, and Chinese representatives from the foreign ministry, the ministry of national defense, former diplomatic missions and think-tanks. They will discuss fairness and justice in the region, multilateralism, development for security, dialogue between civilizations and other topics.
我们期待本次论坛能为各方在中东安全治理领域开辟新思路、探讨新路径提供契机和平台。
We hope this forum will provide an opportunity and a platform for exploring new thinking and new practice in the fields of security and governance in the Middle East.
问：第一个问题，美国总统特朗普周五接受福克斯新闻采访时表示，他自己阻止了中方向香港派遣军队，并警告否则会对经贸协议产生负面影响。
First question, US President Trump said in a Fox news interview on Friday that he personally stopped China from sending soldiers into Hong Kong by warning this would have a negative impact on the trade deal.
你能否证实？第二个问题，中方如何看待香港区议会选举中“民主派”的“胜利”？
Is this true? Second question, how does China view the victory for "pro-democracy" candidates in the Hong Kong district elections?
答：关于你的第一个问题，这里我要再次强调，香港事务纯属中国内政，任何外国政府、组织和个人都无权干预。
To answer your first question, I'd like to stress again that Hong Kong affairs are purely China's internal affairs that allow no foreign interference.
中国政府维护国家主权、安全、发展利益的决心坚定不移，贯彻“一国两制”方针的决心坚定不移，反对任何外部势力干涉香港事务的决心坚定不移。
China is determined in safeguarding national sovereignty, security and development interests. We are determined in implementing the principle of "one country, two systems" and in opposing external interference in Hong Kong affairs.
至于中美经贸问题，我们的立场是一贯的、也是明确的。
Regarding China-US trade talks, our position remains consistent and clear.
我们希望美方能够同中方相向而行，在平等和相互尊重的基础上，找到双方都能接受的解决办法。这符合中美两国利益，也符合世界利益。
We hope the US will work with China to find a mutually acceptable solution based on equality and mutual respect, which will serve the interests of China, the US and beyond.
关于你的第二个问题，我的回应是，止暴制乱、恢复秩序是香港当前最紧迫的任务。
To answer your second question, the most pressing task for Hong Kong at the moment is stopping violence and restoring order.
香港是中国的香港，香港事务纯属中国内政。
As Hong Kong is part of China, its affairs are purely domestic affairs.
问：俄罗斯副外长里亚布科夫表示，将出席11月27日在北京举行的军控问题磋商，你能否确认相关安排。
Russian Vice Foreign Minister Sergey Ryabkov said he will attend the consultations on arms control in Beijing on November 27. Can you confirm that?
中方哪位官员与会？双方将讨论哪些议题？中方有何期待？
Which Chinese diplomats will be there and what will be discussed? Can you share with us your expectations for the consultations?
答：据我了解，中俄将于11月27日举行双边战略稳定磋商，就双方共同关心的重要军控问题交换意见，有关的具体情况我们会适时发布。
As I know, China and Russia will hold bilateral consultations on strategic stability on November 27, where we will exchange views on major issues of mutual interest on arms control. We will release the updates in due course.
问：据报道，美国联邦通信委员会（FCC）22日一致决定，初步将华为和中兴公司列为构成国家安全威胁的企业，将禁止美电信运营商使用“通用服务基金”采购华为和中兴的服务和设备。
According to reports, on November 22, the US Federal Communications Commission initially designated Huawei Technologies Company and ZTE Corp. as companies that pose a national security threat and barred American telecommunications carriers from using the Universal Service Fund (USF) to purchase equipment and services from the two companies.
答：我们注意到有关报道，也注意到中方公司已经作出了回应。
We note relevant reports and the response from the Chinese company.
美方惯于在拿不出任何证据的情况下，以莫须有的罪名，滥用国家力量，打压特定国家和特定企业，之前曾经整垮了阿尔斯通公司，今天又想挤压中国企业。
Without any evidence, the US has been using trumped-up charges and abusing national power to oppress certain countries and businesses. It dealt Alstom a heavy blow with such maneuvering, and now it is trying to squeeze China's private companies.
美方这种经济霸凌行径是公然对美方自己一贯标榜的市场经济原则的否定。
This kind of economic bullying is a denial of "market economy" that the US claims to champion.
如果这一原则无需遵守的话，其他国家也可以对美国的企业如法炮制。
Were there no need for this principle to be complied with, other countries could do the same to US businesses.
禁止美国运营商购买华为和中兴设备，并不能真正改善美国的网络安全状况，反而会对美国农村和欠发达地区的网络服务产生严重影响，美方有关机构对此十分清楚。
Prohibiting American carriers from purchasing Huawei and ZTE equipment won't help US network security. On the contrary, it will undermine network services in rural and underdeveloped areas. Relevant US departments are fully aware of that.
大家都想问的是，那些所谓“保护美国利益”的政策，到底是为了谁的利益而存在？制定这些政策的美方官员，一再以莫须有的罪名打压外国企业，甚至不惜牺牲美国企业和民众的利益，他们到底居心何在？
It begs this question: whose interests are behind those policies that are meant to "protect American interests"? And what are those politicians truly after when they formulate those policies to oppress foreign companies at the expense of the interests of American businesses and citizens?
在此，我们再次敦促美方停止泛化国家安全概念，停止对中国的蓄意抹黑和指责，停止对中国特定企业的无理打压，为中国企业在美国正常经营提供公平、公正、非歧视的环境。
Once again we urge the US to stop the pan-security trajectory, stop smears and allegations against China, stop wanton oppression against Chinese companies, and instead provide a fair, just and non-discriminatory environment for their operation in the US.
最后，我要奉劝美方一些人，以“安全”为名，锁住所有的门，囚禁的只是自己。
A word of advice to some people in the US: if you lock all the doors to seek "security", you will only find yourself locked out of the world.
问：你对一个叫王立强的中国人在澳大利亚媒体的有关表态有何回应？
What's your response to Chinese citizen Wang Liqiang's claims in Australia?
答：你应该已经看到了，上海市公安局静安分局已于11月23日通报了有关情况。
As you may have read, a statement was released by the Jing'an division of Shanghai's public security bureau on November 23.
王立强系涉案在逃人员，因涉嫌诈骗罪已被公安机关立案侦查。
Wang Liqiang is a fugitive and has been investigated by the public security organ for suspicion of fraud.
他持有的所谓中华人民共和国护照和香港永久居民身份证均系伪造证件。
The PRC passport and Hong Kong resident document he held were both forged.
目前，公安机关对此案正在进一步地调查当中。
This case is still under investigation as we speak.
我们也注意到，在中方有关部门第一时间发布权威消息、指出谬误、作出澄清之后，澳方个别媒体和人士置若罔闻，仍然坚持错误立场，执意采信一个涉嫌犯罪、完全没有可信度人物的话，迫不及待地大肆炒作所谓“中国威胁论”，极尽对中国造谣抹黑之能事，上演了一出拙劣的闹剧，实在令人瞠目结舌、匪夷所思。
The Chinese competent authority noted the misinformation and made clarifications on this case at the earliest time possible. However, some Australian media and people are still clinging to their wrong position, quoting a person who is a criminal suspect and has zero credibility, hyping up so-called "China threat" or "Chinese espionage", and making smear campaigns that only turned out to be an unbelievably awkward farce.
我们奉劝澳方有关媒体和人士尊重已经明确无误的事实和真相，恪守起码的职业道德操守，放下意识形态偏见，摘掉有色眼镜，不要再做不负责任、徒增笑柄的事情。
Our advice to those Australian media and people is to respect the truth, have some professional morals, give up ideological bias and stop doing things that are ridiculous and irresponsible.
问：据了解，近日，北京市公安局对美国非政府组织“亚洲促进会”在中国境内开展项目活动进行了查处。
We have learned that the Beijing Public Security Bureau took action on a US non-governmental organization (NGO) called Asia Catalyst regarding its programs in China.
你能否证实?
Could you confirm this?
答：你消息还挺灵通。
You seem to be well-informed on this.
据从公安部门了解，2018年3月，“亚洲促进会”未依法登记、备案在中国境内开展项目活动，涉嫌违反《境外非政府组织境内活动管理法》有关规定。
According to relevant public security authorities, in March 2018, Asia Catalyst conducted activities before registration or filing record in China, therefore violating the Law on the Administration of Activities of Overseas Non-Governmental Organizations within the Territory of China.
在事实清楚，证据确凿的情况下，近日，北京市公安机关依据《境外非政府组织境内活动管理法》、《行政处罚法》和《公安机关办理行政案件程序规定》，对该组织及相关涉案人员进行了公开依法处罚。
With clear facts and conclusive evidence, public security authorities in Beijing openly imposed penalties on this organization and individuals involved pursuant to the Law on the Administration of Activities of Overseas Non-Governmental Organizations within the Territory of China, Law on Administrative Penalty, and the Provisions on the Procedures for Handling Administrative Cases by Public Security Organs.
这里我要强调，中方一贯欢迎境外非政府组织来华开展友好交流与合作。
I need to stress that we always welcome overseas NGOs to engage in exchange and cooperation in China.
只要境外非政府组织遵守中国的法律法规，我们愿为其在华开展活动提供便利。
As long as they abide by Chinese laws and regulations, we are ready to facilitate their activities.
同时我们希望境外非政府组织在中国不要做违法的事情。
At the same time, we hope personnel of overseas NGOs will not do anything illegal.
对于那些从事违法违规活动、危害中国国家安全的组织，中国政府将坚决依法予以处置。
Organizations that violate laws and regulations and undermine China's national security shall be handled in accordance with law.
问：中国驻英国使馆官员称，国际媒体周日报道的有关新疆的内部文件纯属编造，是假消息。
The Chinese Embassy in London said the internal documents regarding Xinjiang published by media on Sunday were pure fabrication and fake news.
对于17家媒体都报道了内部文件这一“假消息”，外交部有何评论？
Does the Foreign Ministry have any explanation or comment on why 17 different media outlets would publish the same so-called fake news on Xinjiang?
答：上周我曾经就《纽约时报》炒作所谓的内部文件一事对外作出过回应。
I responded to questions regarding so-called "internal documents" hyped up by the New York Times last week.
这里我想重申一下，新疆事务纯属中国的内政，个别媒体使用卑劣的手法炒作涉疆问题，污蔑抹黑中国新疆反恐和去极端化努力的图谋不会得逞。
Let me reiterate our position that Xinjiang affairs are China's internal affairs. Certain media are trying to smear China's counter-terrorism and de-radicalization efforts in Xinjiang by despicably hyping up Xinjiang-related issues, but their attempts will not succeed.
新疆保持大局稳定，民族团结、社会和谐，就是对这些媒体造谣最有力的回击。
Stability, ethnic solidarity and harmony in Xinjiang is the best response to such disinformation.
问：鉴于当前香港区议会选举结果，林郑月娥是否还应继续担任香港特区行政长官？
In light of the election results, should Carrie Lam now still consider her position as the Chief Executive?
答：你应该知道，我们的立场很明确，中国中央政府坚定支持林郑月娥行政长官带领特区政府依法施政，坚定支持香港警方严正执法、恢复秩序，也坚定支持香港司法机关依法惩治暴力犯罪分子。
Our position is crystal clear. The central government firmly supports the Chief Executive Carrie Lam in leading the SAR government to administer Hong Kong, supports the police in enforcing law and restoring order, and supports the judicial organs in punishing violent criminals.
问：日前，美国主管南亚事务的代理助理国务卿威尔斯在美伍德罗·威尔逊国际学者中心发表演讲时称，中巴经济走廊给巴基斯坦带来巨额债务负担，美方经济合作模式优于中方。
Speaking at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, US Acting Assistant Secretary for the Bureau of South and Central Asian Affairs Alice Wells criticized the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC), accusing it would only increase debt burden on Pakistan. She also said that the American mode of economic cooperation is better than China's.
中方对此有何评论？
What's your response?
答：我想你可能已经注意到了，中国驻巴基斯坦大使已第一时间就此作出了回应。
Perhaps you noted the response from the Chinese ambassador to Pakistan made at the earliest time possible.
包括巴基斯坦外长、计划部长、国民议会议长、参议院外事委员会主席等在内的巴方各界人士也都在第一时间批驳了美方的言论。
There were also immediate refutations from Pakistan, including the Foreign Minister, the Federal Minister for Planning and Development, Speaker of the National Assembly, and Chairman of the Senate Foreign Affairs Committee.
这里我要说的是，威尔斯女士的有关言论纯属老调重弹，与美方一些到处诋毁中国的人，抹黑中巴经济走廊建设、污蔑“一带一路”倡议的言论如出一辙。
Ms. Wells' remarks are nothing new. They are a mere repetition of old slanders against China, the CPEC and the BRI like those chanted by some in the US.
对于这些言论，中巴双方都已经多次予以澄清和批驳。
China and Pakistan have clarified and refuted such smears time and again.
但美方有些人依然背同样的台词、演同样的戏码，即使演砸了也不罢休，底下观众喝倒彩也不下台。
However, some in the US still use the same old script. They don't stop though the show has become a complete disaster, and they don't get off the stage even when booed by the audience.
既然美方如此执着，今天我也执着一下，我把我们多次说过的批驳口径再重复一下：
Since they are trying so hard, allow me to try and match their perseverance with the same position I stated time and again.
第一，中方在推进中巴经济走廊建设过程中，始终遵循共商共建共享原则，始终把巴基斯坦人民的利益作为最优先的考虑。
First, in advancing CPEC development, China is committed to the principle of consultation and cooperation for shared benefits. We put Pakistani people's interests first.
走廊建设5年多来，取得了重大积极进展。目前，至少22个项目已经取得早期收获，极大改善了巴当地交通基础设施和电力供应，给巴创造了数万个就业机会，带动巴每年经济增长1至2个百分点，为促进巴经济社会发展、提高人民福祉发挥了日益重要的作用。
Major progress has been achieved in the past five years, with early harvests reaped in at least 22 projects. This has significantly improved local transportation infrastructure and power supply, created tens of thousands of jobs for Pakistanis and contributed one to two percent of economic growth in Pakistan.

It shows that the CPEC is playing an increasingly important role in boosting Pakistan's socioeconomic development and improving people's livelihood.
走廊建设行不行，中巴合作好不好，事实和数据已经给出了答案。
Whether the CPEC works and whether China-Pakistan cooperation is good or not, the answer is presented to you in facts and data.
第二，美方罔顾事实，不停地拿捏造出来的所谓债务问题说事，其真实意图就是要干扰中巴经济走廊建设，挑拨中巴关系，用心极为险恶。
Second, the US side, in total disregard of facts, has been talking all about the fabricated "debt issue" with the true aim to disrupt CPEC development and sow discord in China-Pakistan relations with malicious calculations.
事实上，目前巴方所持的外债中，一半来自多边金融机构。
As a matter of fact, half of Pakistan's foreign debt is from multilateral financial institutions.
中巴经济走廊项目中，80%以上是由中方直接投资或由中方无偿援助，只有不到20%使用中方贷款。
More than 80 percent of CPEC projects are funded by direct investment or grants from China, with less than 20 percent using Chinese loans.
根据巴方公布的数据，目前中巴经济走廊债务是49亿美元，还不到巴债务总额的十分之一。
According to statistics released by the Pakistani side, debt incurred from the CPEC stands at 4.9 billion US dollars, less than one tenth of Pakistan's total debt.
美方有些人恐怕不是算术不好，而是心术不正。
I'm afraid certain individuals in the US are not bad at math, but rather misguided by evil calculations.
第三，如果美方愿意与巴方开展合作，帮助巴基斯坦加快国家发展建设，我们希望美方能拿出真金白银、说到做到，而不是总耍嘴皮子，总做搅局者。
Third, if the US would like to conduct cooperation with Pakistan and help to accelerate its development, it should take concrete measures and honor its commitments instead of always paying lip service and being the spoiler.
自己做不到，也不让别人做，自己做不好，也不让别人做好，这种心态很不健康，这种作法很不地道。
It is neither healthy nor honorable to prevent others from delivering what one fails to.
最后，不管美方怎么说、怎么做，怎么干扰、怎么破坏，我们都会和巴方一道继续坚定不移地推动中巴经济走廊建设，继续推动中巴全天候战略合作伙伴关系向前发展，让更多的巴基斯坦民众从中受益，让更多的中巴合作成果惠及地区以及世界。
Finally, whatever the US says or does to sabotage our cooperation, China will work with Pakistan for steady progress in the CPEC and in our all-weather strategic cooperative partnership to bring more benefits to the Pakistani people, to the region and beyond.
问：当前香港区议会选举结果对“民主派”较为有利。
Back to the Hong Kong elections.
这一结果是否意味着中国中央政府应该或将会重新考虑如何处理香港局势？
Does the resounding result in favor of the pro-democracy camp mean China should or would reconsider how it has handled Hong Kong affairs?
答：刚才回答记者提问时我已经说过了，止暴制乱、恢复秩序是香港当前最紧迫的任务。
As I said earlier, the most pressing task for Hong Kong at the moment is stopping violence and restoring order.
问：澳大利亚情报官员称，他们正就疑似中国间谍试图安插人员进入澳联邦议会进行调查。
Australian intelligence officials said they are investigating a plot to plant a Chinese spy in the nation's parliament.
你有何评论？
Do you have any comment?
答：中国一贯奉行不干涉别国内政的原则。
China doesn't interfere in other countries' internal affairs.
我们在相互尊重、平等互利基础上，同包括澳大利亚在内的各国发展友好合作关系。
We develop friendly cooperation with Australia and other countries based on mutual respect, equality and mutual benefit.
我们从来没有、也从来不感兴趣去干涉别国内政。
We have not interfered and are never interested in interfering in other countries' domestic affairs.
一段时间以来，澳大利亚的一些政客、一些机构，还有一些媒体，在涉华的问题上表现出高度的紧张，已经到了风声鹤唳、草木皆兵的地步。
Some Australian politicians, institutions and media have been highly tense on China-related issues. They seem to have reached a state of hysteria and extreme nervousness.
他们不断编造所谓中国的“间谍案”，对澳大利亚的“渗透案”，我想无论情节多么离奇，花样如何翻新，谎言终究是谎言。
Stories like "Chinese espionage" or "China's infiltration in Australia", with however bizarre plots and eye-catching details, are nothing but lies.
我们希望澳方的有关政客、有关机构和有关媒体，能够有一个健康的心态来看待中国，看待中澳关系，这有利于中澳关系健康稳定发展，也有利于他们自己的身心健康。
We hope those Australian politicians, institutions and media can view China and China-Australia relations with a healthy attitude, which will truly contribute to the sound and stable growth of bilateral relations as well as their own physical and mental health.
问：《环球时报》刊文称中美十分接近达成第一阶段经贸协议，你能否证实？
A recent Global Times report said China and the US are very close to the phase one deal. Can you confirm this?
答：关于中美经贸问题，我这里能告诉你的是，中美双方一直保持着密切沟通。
On China-US trade talks, we have been in close communication with the US side.
我们希望双方能够在平等和相互尊重的基础上，找到双方都能接受的解决办法。这符合中国利益，符合美国利益，也符合世界利益。
We hope the US will work with China to find a mutually acceptable solution based on equality and mutual respect, which will serve the interests of China, the US and beyond.
至于磋商的具体情况和进展，建议你向商务部询问。
I'll leave the specifics to the Ministry of Commerce.
2019年11月22日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on November 22, 2019
问：日前，俄罗斯总统普京在出席第十一届“俄罗斯在召唤”投资论坛时表示，美国企图遏制中俄是大错特错。
At the 11th "Russia Calling" investment forum, Russian President Putin said that the US is utterly wrong when it tries to contain China and Russia.
中方对此如何评价？
What's your comment?
答：中方高度赞赏普京总统所作的积极和明确表态。
We highly commend President Putin's statement.
一个时期以来，个别国家奉行单边主义，粗暴干涉他国内政，肆意挥舞制裁大棒，严重冲击现行国际秩序，严重破坏现行国际关系体系。
For quite some time, certain countries have pursued unilateralism, grossly interfered in others' internal affairs and wantonly imposed sanctions. Those behaviors have severely undermined the existing international order and the system of international relations.
这种做法无疑是在开历史倒车，的确是“大错特错”，也注定不得人心。
Such practice is indeed utterly wrong and unpopular as they aim to reverse the wheel of history.
中俄作为联合国安理会常任理事国和主要新兴经济体，在维护国家主权与安全、维护国际关系基本准则、反对单边主义和霸凌行径、反对干涉他国内政方面有着共同利益和共同诉求。
As permanent members of the UN Security Council and major emerging economies, China and Russia share common interests and aspirations in defending sovereignty and security, safeguarding the basic norms governing international relations, and opposing unilateralism, bullying practices and foreign interference.
当前形势下，两国有责任、有义务体现大国担当，肩负起维护世界和平稳定，捍卫国际公平正义的历史使命。
It is our two countries' duty and historical mission to uphold world peace, stability, fairness and justice.
中俄双方将在两国元首重要共识的引领下，进一步增进战略互信，密切战略沟通，深化全方位合作，加大相互支持力度，坚定不移深化中俄新时代全面战略协作伙伴关系，共同维护多边主义和全球化进程，为促进地区和世界的稳定与繁荣发挥更大作用。
Guided by the important consensus of our presidents, China and Russia will continue to enhance strategic mutual trust and communication and all-round cooperation, give greater support to each other, deepen our comprehensive strategic partnership of coordination for a new era, uphold multilateralism and globalization, and make greater efforts in safeguarding stability and prosperity of the region and beyond.
问：据报道，《韩日军事情报保护协定》将于明日零时终止。
South Korea and Japan will terminate the General Security of Military Information Agreement from midnight tomorrow.
答：我们注意到有关报道。
I noted relevant reports.
我们一直认为，对外开展或终止军事安全合作是主权国家的自主权利。
We believe that to start or terminate military security cooperation is the independent right of a sovereign country.
同时，有关方面达成的双边安排应有利于地区和平稳定，有利于推动半岛和平进程，不损害第三方利益。
In the meantime, the bilateral arrangement between relevant parties should be conducive to regional peace and stability as well as the peace process on the Korean Peninsula, and not harmful to the interests of a third party.
问：据报道，美国司法部宣称，孟山都公司前雇员Haitao Xiang以盗取商业秘密罪被起诉。
The US Justice Department announced that a man named Haitao Xiang, a former employee of Monsanto, was indicted for stealing commercial secrets.
他是中国“千人计划”项目一员。
Haitao Xiang was also a member of the Chinese Thousand Talents Program.
美指控中国政府利用该计划窃取美知识产权。中方对此有何回应？
Does China have a response to this indictment?
答：我不了解你说的具体情况。
I'm not aware of the specific case you mentioned.
但我想，无论是中国公民还是美国公民，如果在美国有违法行为，美方依法对其进行公正处理，我们对此没有意见。
But I think for a citizen who violates law in the US, whether he is a Chinese or American, if the US handles that justly in accordance with law, we have no objection.
但我们坚决反对美方借题发挥，把一个普通、孤立的案件说成是中方有组织、有计划地从美方窃取知识产权。
However, we firmly oppose the US using this isolated case to falsely accuse China of organized, planned intellectual property theft.
我们多次说过，所谓中方从美方窃取知识产权的说法完全是别有用心。
Like we said repeatedly, such allegation is made with ulterior motives.
这里我要指出：第一，中国的科技成就一不靠偷，二不靠抢，是中国人民凭借智慧和汗水拼搏奋斗出来的。
I want to point out: first, China has not achieved its technological development through theft or robbery. Instead, it is achieved with our talent and hard work.
第二，中美加强科技交流合作，符合双方共同利益，也有利于推动科技进步，造福全人类。
Second, the strengthening of science and technology exchange and cooperation between China and the US serves the common interests of both sides and contributes to progress of mankind.
问：据报道，美国国际教育协会发布的《2019美国门户开放报告》显示，2018至2019年度，中国继续成为美国最大的留学生来源国，但是受签证等问题的影响，中国赴美留学生增长率放缓，为十年来最低。
According to the Open Doors 2019 report published by the US Institute of International Education, from 2018 to 2019, China continued to be America's biggest source of international students, but the increase rate was the lowest in the past 10 years because of visa restrictions and other issues.
请问你如何看待这一变化？
How do you view such change?
答：我看到了这份报告，也注意到报告提到，在2018年至2019年度，不仅是中国赴美留学生增长率放缓，美国高校整体国际学生数量的增长率也大幅放缓。
I noted this report. It says that from 2018 to 2019, the growth rate of not only Chinese students, but also international students, dropped significantly in the US.
这充分说明，一段时间以来美方采取的一些政策明显地影响了美国的形象和声誉，阻碍了美方与外界的交往与沟通，也损害了美方自身的利益。
This tells us how recent US policies have affected its image and reputation, obstructed its exchange with other countries, and undermined its own interests.
也难怪此前很多美教育界人士都在这一问题上明确表达了担忧和关切。
No wonder many in the US educational community expressed concerns.
我们多次说过，留学生交流一直是中美人文交流的重要内容。
As we said before, exchange of students has always been an important part in China-US people-to-people ties.
就在昨天，也就是21日，中国驻美国大使馆与美国国务院教文局合作举办了中美留学40周年纪念活动。
Just yesterday, the Chinese embassy in Washington D. C. and the Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs of the US Department of State jointly held a commemorative event for the 40th anniversary of China-US exchange of students.
美国前总统卡特向活动发去了贺信。卡特先生在贺信中特别提到，中美关系正常化谈判时，一个重要的议题就是留学生交流。
Former US President Carter sent a congratulatory message to this event, where he wrote specifically about exchange of students as an important topic in the negotiations on normalization of bilateral relations between China and the US.
40年来，中美教育交流迅猛发展。
In the past four decades, educational exchange developed rapidly, during which over 330,000 Americans students studied in China.
40年间，有33万多名美国学生来华学习，中国已成为最受美国学生欢迎的留学目的国之一，而中国也已连续十年位居美国海外留学生第一大生源国，仅2018-2019学年，中国在美留学生总数就达37万，占美国国际学生总数的三分之一。
China is one of the most popular destinations of higher education for American students. For ten consecutive years, China has been the biggest source of international students in the US. In the period from 2018 to 2019 alone, 370,000 Chinese students study in the US, one-third of the total of international students in that country.
两国留学生交流长期以来有力地促进了两国人民之间的相互沟通与相互了解，为中美各自的发展进步发挥了巨大的推动作用。
Exchange of students has long been advancing communication and mutual understanding between the two countries as well as each other's development.
40年后的今天，中美双方更应该秉持开放包容的心态，为两国留学合作积极创造条件，推动中美人文交流不断向前发展。
Today, it is all the more important for us to create positive conditions for exchange of students as well as people-to-people ties with an open and inclusive attitude.
特朗普总统和包括布兰斯塔德大使在内的美方高级官员近来也多次表示，美方欢迎中国留学生赴美国留学。
President Trump, Ambassador Branstad and other senior US officials said on many occasions that Chinese students are welcome in the US.
我们希望美方顺应两国人民的愿望，将有关的积极表态落到实处。
We hope the US side can take real actions in achieving what our two peoples aspire for.
也希望明年的这个时候，我们在新一份年度报告里，能够看到一些积极的变化。
In next year's report, we hope to see some promising changes.
问：据报道，最近一份为菲律宾国会议员准备的内部报告称，由于中国国家电网公司控制了菲律宾全国电网公司40%股权，使中国对菲国家安全构成威胁。
An internal report to Philippine senators reportedly said that China's State Grid Corp has a 40% stake in the National Grid Corporation of the Philippines, which gives the Chinese government a control over the Philippines' national grid, posing a security threat.
在本月菲国会能源预算听证会上，一些菲国会议员对此表示担忧。
At a budget hearing this month, some Philippine senators expressed concerns over this.
中方对此有何回应？
What's your comment?
答：你说的情况我还不掌握，可以会后去了解一下。
I'm not aware of the situation you mentioned, I will check on that later.
我可以告诉你的是，在中菲两国领导人的政治引领下，中菲关系实现了转圜、巩固和提高，目前各领域的交流合作在稳步推进。
What I can tell you is that under the political guidance of our leaders, the China-Philippines relations have turned around and improved, with steady progress seen in exchange and cooperation across the board.
我们愿同菲方一道，不断深化双方在各领域、特别是在“一带一路”框架下的合作，不断为两国人民带来更多福祉。
We stand ready to work with the Philippines to deepen our cooperation in various fields, especially under the BRI framework, to deliver more benefits to our two peoples.
问：据报道，昨天，马来西亚警方逮捕了680名中国公民，怀疑他们涉及电信诈骗活动。
According to reports, Malaysian police arrested 680 Chinese citizens on suspicion of telecom fraud.
答：中国驻马来西亚大使馆已经收到了马方有关通报。
The Chinese Embassy in Malaysia has been informed by the Malaysian side.
中方支持马方依法打击违法犯罪活动，希望马方公正处理有关案件。
China supports Malaysia in fighting crimes in accordance with law and hopes Malaysia will handle the case in a just manner.
在此，我要再次强调，海外中国公民应遵守当地法律法规，切勿参与任何形式的违法犯罪活动。
I would like to stress once again that overseas Chinese citizens should abide by local laws and regulations and must not engage in any illegal activities.
问：据报道，今天，台湾“外长”称，中方承诺向几个台湾前“邦交国”提供投资和援助，但这些钱并没有到位。
Taiwan's "foreign minister" today said that China had promised aid and investment to several former allies to Taiwan, but that money hasn't come.
他还说，中国向这些国家输出腐败和威权主义。
The "foreign minister" also said that China is exporting corruption and authoritarianism to these countries.
中方对此有何回应？
Do you have a response?
答：我这里要先纠正你一下，我们从不承认台湾“外长”这一称谓。
I should correct you first. We do not recognize the so-called "foreign minister" of Taiwan.
希望你今后提问时用正确的说法。
I hope you will get the terms right next time.
关于你的问题，我可以告诉你，一个中国原则是国际社会的普遍共识，坚持一个中国原则是公认的国际关系准则。
As to your question, I can tell you that the one-China principle is the universal consensus of the international community and commitment to this principle is a widely recognized norm in international relations.
我们愿在一个中国原则基础上，同世界各国发展友好合作关系。
We stand ready to develop friendly cooperative relations with the rest of the world on the basis of the one-China principle.
至于台湾方面提到的一些情况，我想说的是，我们同世界上很多国家在互利共赢的基础上开展友好合作。
I want to say that we have friendly cooperation with many countries on the basis of mutual benefit.
这些合作不仅符合中方的利益，也符合有关国家的利益，为这些国家的人民带来了实实在在的好处，必将继续受到欢迎。
Such cooperation is in the interests of not only China, but also those countries themselves. With tangible benefits delivered, such cooperation will continue to be welcomed by the local people.
这种合作不是任何人的攻击和抹黑能够抹杀的。
It just cannot be discredited by any attacks or slanders.
问：据路透社报道，中国领导人昨晚在人民大会堂就中美贸易摩擦发表了一些评论。
There is a Reuters report saying that the Chinese leader made comments on the trade war with the US last night at a dinner event in the Great Hall of the People.
你看到报道了吗？
I was wondering have you read that?
答：我目前还没看到。
I haven't seen the report yet.
路透社记者你看到了吗？（路透社记者......）
Has the Reuters correspondent seen that?
记者：报道说，中国领导人表示，我们愿在平等和相互尊重的基础上，同美方达成第一阶段经贸协议。
Follow-up: According to the report, the Chinese leader said we will work for a phase one agreement on the basis of mutual respect and equality.
必要的时候，我们会回击。
When necessary we will fight back.
但我们一直在努力避免贸易战。
But we have been working actively to try not have a trade war.
贸易战不是中方发起的，也不是我们想要的。
We did not initiate this trade war and this is not something we want.
答：你要是想核实这则报道的真假，最好去向路透社的同事询问。
If you want to verify the veracity of this report, you'd better turn to the Reuters correspondent.
关于中方在中美经贸问题上的立场，我可以明确告诉你，中美双方一直保持着密切沟通。
As to China's position on the trade issue, I can tell you clearly that China and the US stay in close communication.
我们希望美方能同中方相向而行，在相互尊重和平等互利的基础上，找到解决问题的办法。
We hope the US will work with China to find a solution on the basis of mutual respect, equality and mutual benefit.
这符合中方利益，也符合美方利益，当然也符合世界利益。
This serves the interests of both sides and the rest of the world.
问：《华尔街日报》不问这个问题，我来问。
I want to ask this question since the Wall Street Journal isn't going to.
昨天，《华尔街日报》报道称，中方已邀请美国贸易代表莱特希泽和财长姆努钦在感恩节前来北京进行新一轮经贸磋商。
According to yesterday's report by the Wall Street Journal, China invited USTR Robert Lighthizer and Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin to visit Beijing for another round of trade talks before Thanksgiving.
你能否证实？对此有何评论？
Can you confirm that and do you have any comments?
答：在昨天中国商务部举行的记者会上，商务部新闻发言人已经回答了中美经贸磋商的有关问题。
The spokesperson of China's Ministry of Commerce responded to questions related to trade talks yesterday in a press briefing.
你应该知道，关于中美经贸磋商，我只负责作原则回应。
You may be aware that here I only have a principled response.
至于具体问题，包括中美经贸磋商的具体安排，建议你还是向商务部询问。
I'd still refer you to the Ministry of Commerce for more information.
问：据报道，本月21日和22日，美国海军军舰连续两天在中国南海开展“航行自由”行动。
The US naval vessels conducted operations of "freedom of navigation" in the South China Sea for two consecutive days from November 21 to 22, the frequency of which is rarely seen.
答：11月20日，美国海军“吉福兹”号濒海战斗舰未经中国政府允许，非法进入中国南沙群岛有关岛礁临近海域。
On November 20, the US littoral combat ship Gabrielle Giffords illegally entered the adjacent waters of China's Nansha Islands without permission from the Chinese government.
11月21日上午，美“迈耶”号驱逐舰又擅自闯入中国西沙群岛领海。
On the morning of November 21, the US destroyer Wayne E. Meyer intruded in China's territorial seas off the Xisha Islands.
中国南部战区依法对美国有关舰船全程进行跟踪监视、查证识别并予以警告驱离。
China's Southern Theater Command lawfully tracked, verified, identified those vessels and warned them off.
美方行为严重损害中国主权和安全利益，破坏南海和平稳定，我们对此表示坚决反对。
The US move severely undermined China's sovereignty and security interests as well as peace and stability in the South China Sea. We firmly oppose that.
中方已就此向美方提出严正交涉，表达强烈抗议。
China has made stern representations and strong protests to the US side.
中方一贯尊重和维护各国依据国际法在南海享有的航行与飞越自由，但坚决反对任何国家以航行与飞越自由为名，损害中国的主权和安全。
China respects and safeguards all countries' freedom of navigation and overflight in the South China Sea according to international law. That said, we firmly oppose the behavior of any country to undermine China's sovereignty and security under the pretext of such freedom.
当前，南海局势总体稳定，有关各方聚焦对话与合作。
Currently the situation in the South China Sea is stable, and all parties concerned are focusing on dialogue and cooperation.
我们敦促美方立即停止此类挑衅行为，不要逆势而动，避免损害地区的和平与安宁。
We urge the US to immediately stop such provocations that hurt regional peace and tranquility.
中方将采取一切必要措施，坚定维护国家主权和安全，维护南海的和平稳定。
China will take all necessary measures to safeguard national sovereignty and security as well as peace and stability in the South China Sea.
问：据报道，澳大利亚前情报局长邓肯·路易斯称，中方通过全面系统的“间谍行为”来操弄澳大利亚的政治体制。
Australia's former intelligence chief Duncan Lewis has said that China wants to take over Australia's political system with an insidious and systemic campaign of espionage.
鉴于澳国内一直有人指控中国试图影响澳政界人士，你是否认为他的这一说法有一定可信度？
I'm wondering whether there is any credibility to this because there have been repeated allegations of China attempting to influence politicians and political figures in Australia?
答：对于澳大利亚有关人士的类似说法，我们已经多次作过回应。
We responded so many times to similar remarks.
我懒得再重复了。
I don't want to repeat myself time and again.
我只想提醒澳方有关人士，对自己国家的政治体制要稍微自信一点。
I just want to remind certain people in Australia to have a little bit more confidence in their political system.
2019年11月21日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on November 21, 2019
应日本外相茂木敏充邀请，国务委员兼外交部长王毅将于11月22日至26日率团出席在日本名古屋举行的二十国集团外长会议，对日本进行正式访问，并同日本外相茂木敏充共同举行中日高级别人文交流磋商机制首次会议。
Invited by Japanese Foreign Minister Toshimitsu Motegi, from November 22 to 26, State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi will lead the Chinese delegation to attend the G20 Foreign Ministers' Meeting in Nagoya, Japan, pay an official visit to Japan, and co-chair with Foreign Minister Motegi the first meeting of high-level consultation on cultural and people-to-people exchange between China and Japan.
问：你刚刚发布了王毅国务委员将出席二十国集团外长会并对日本进行正式访问的消息。
You just announced State Councilor Wang Yi's attendance atthe G20 foreign ministers' meeting and his visit to Japan.
你能否介绍王毅国务委员此访的具体情况及预期成果？
Can you tell us more details about his visit and your expectations of it?
答：二十国集团是国际经济合作的主要论坛。
The G20 is a major platform for international economic cooperation.
当前，单边主义和保护主义严重冲击国际秩序，世界经济面临的风险和不确定性明显上升。
The international order is currently undermined by unilateralism and protectionism, and the world economy faces greater risks and uncertainties.
王毅国务委员兼外长在出席本届二十国集团外长会期间，将参加关于促进自由贸易与全球治理、可持续发展、非洲等议题的讨论，深入阐述中方对世界经济形势、贸易、金融、发展等问题的看法主张。
State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi will present China's in-depth and thorough views on the world economy, trade, finance and development during discussions on promoting free trade and global governance, sustainable development and Africa in this G20 foreign ministers' meeting.
中方希望此次外长会能够推动各方坚定维护多边主义，牢牢把握二十国集团合作方向，共同应对全球挑战。
We expect this meeting will help all parties strengthen confidence in upholding multilateralism, firmly grasp the direction of G20 cooperation going forward and work together to address global challenges.
王毅国务委员还将与有关国家外长举行双边会见，致力于促进双边关系的发展。
On the sidelines of the meeting, State Councilor Wang will also have bilateral meetings with his foreign counterparts for better collaboration an bilateral relations.
王毅国务委员访问日本期间，将与日本领导人及各界人士会面，同外相茂木敏充进行会谈，共同启动中日高级别人文交流磋商机制并主持首次会议。
During his visit to Japan, State Councilor Wang will meet with the Japanese leaders and representatives from various sectors, have talks with Foreign Minister Motegi, jointly launch the China-Japan high-level consultation on cultural and people-to-people exchange and co-chair the first meeting of this mechanism.
王毅国务委员此访是两国加强高层交往和沟通的重要举措。
State Councilor Wang's visit will be an important step for closer high-level exchange and communication between China and Japan.
希望双方通过此访深入沟通、凝聚共识、管控分歧、扩大合作，共同增强和维护中日关系向好势头。
Through this visit, we hope our two countries will strengthen dialogue, consolidate consensus, manage differences, expand cooperation and jointly keep and build up greater positive momentum for bilateral relations.
问：昨天，美国国会众院通过了“香港人权与民主法案”。
Now that the US House of Representatives has passed this Hong Kong Human Rights and Democracy Act.
中方会对此作何反应？你昨天说中方必将予以坚决反制，那么中方将采取什么反制措施？这是否会严重影响中美经贸磋商进程？
Could you offer details on how China would react? Yesterday you said that China would take strong countermeasures. Could you offer details on what these are? And could they possibly derail the ongoing trade talks?
答：我们强烈谴责并坚决反对美国国会参众两院通过有关涉港法案，中方已就此向美方提出了严正交涉。
We strongly condemn and firmly oppose the passage of the Hong Kong Human Rights and Democracy Act by the US Congress. China has made stern representations to the US side.
美方的恶劣行径不仅损害中方利益，也将损害美国在香港的重要利益。
By passing this act, the US will undermine not only China's interests but also its own interests in Hong Kong.
我们正告美方认清形势，悬崖勒马，不得将该案签署成法，立即停止插手香港事务，立即停止干涉中国内政。
We urge the US to grasp the situation, stop its wrongdoing before it's too late, and immediately take measures to prevent this act from becoming law. The US should immediately stop interfering in China's internal affairs, including Hong Kong affairs.
如果美方一意孤行，中方必将采取有力措施予以坚决反制。
China will have to take strong countermeasures if the US is bent on having its own way.
任何人都不要低估中方维护国家主权、安全、发展利益的坚定决心，也不要低估中方贯彻“一国两制”方针、维护香港繁荣稳定的坚定决心。
No one should underestimate China's determination to defend its national sovereignty, security and development interests, to implement the "one country, two systems" policy, and to safeguard Hong Kong's prosperity and stability.
至于你关心的中美经贸问题，中方的立场非常明确。
Regarding the trade issue, China's position remains clear.
我们希望美方能同中方相向而行，在相互尊重和平等互利的基础上，找到解决问题的办法。
We hope the US will work with China to meet each other halfway and find a proper settlement on the basis of mutual respect, equality and mutual benefit.
这有利于中美两国经济，也有利于世界经济。
This will be good for the economy of our two countries and beyond.
问：第一个问题，你能否介绍中国驻英国大使刘晓明与英国外交大臣拉布会见的情况？第二个问题，你昨天说，中方会就英方对郑文杰案发表的有关言论向英方提出交涉，中方是否已经提出交涉？
I'm wondering if you could give us a readout of the meeting that Chinese Ambassador to the UK Liu Xiaomin had with the UK Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab? And can you clarify when the Chinese side expects to summon UK representatives, because yesterday you said that China would be doing so, summoning the UK side to speak about Simon Cheng's allegation of torture that he has made?
答：我不知道你是否注意到，中国驻英国大使馆已就刘晓明大使会见英国外交大臣拉布的情况发布了消息。
I wonder whether you've noticed that the Chinese embassy in the UK already issued a readout on Ambassador Liu Xiaoming's meeting with Foreign Secretary Raab.
这里我要重申，郑文杰被行政拘留期间，中国公安机关依法保障了他的各项合法权益。郑文杰也对其违法事实供认不讳。
I shall stress that the police guaranteed all his lawful rights and interests when Simon Cheng was under detention and he confessed all his offenses.
昨天，有记者问我英国外交大臣召见中国驻英大使的情况。
Yesterday, some of you asked about UK Foreign Secretary Raab summoning Ambassador Liu Xiaoming, and I said I was not aware of that then.
我当时的回答是，我还不掌握情况，但我想中国驻英大使绝不会接受英方表达的所谓关切。
But I also said the Chinese ambassador would by no means accept the so-called concerns or representations raised by the UK over this case.
中国驻英大使反而会向英方提出交涉，就英方近来在涉港问题上的一系列错误言行表达我们的不满和我们的关切。
Instead, the Chinese ambassador will lodge representations with the UK to express our indignation and concerns.
如果你仔细阅读中国驻英国使馆发布的消息，可以看出我的判断是正确的。
If you read through the readout issued by the Chinese embassy, you will find my judgment correct.
中国驻英国大使刘晓明当场向英方提出了反交涉，指出郑文杰是香港中国公民，涉及到郑文杰的案件完全是中国的内部事务。
Ambassador Liu Xiaoming lodged representations to the British side then and there. He pointed out that Simon Cheng is a Chinese citizen in Hong Kong, and the case involving him is entirely China's domestic affair.
中国公安机关依法办案，英方提出的所谓交涉完全没有道理。
The Chinese police handled the case in accordance with law.

The UK's so-called representations are simply unjustifiable.
刘晓明大使同时就英方近期在涉港问题上的一系列错误言行表达了中方的强烈不满和坚决反对。
He also expressed indignation and strong opposition to the UK's repeated wrong words and deeds regarding Hong Kong.
追问：但是，郑文杰的说法和深圳警方以及外交部说的完全不同。
Follow-up: Through Simon's account though, what had happened is very different from what the Shenzhen police and the Foreign Ministry have said.
你如何回应郑的说法？
Can you comment on the allegations that he made?
答：我昨天已经说过了，今年8月，中国深圳罗湖公安机关已就郑文杰违法案件对外作了通报。
Like I said yesterday, in August, the police of Luohu District, Shenzhen offered some statements on the case.
郑文杰因违反《中华人民共和国治安管理处罚法》第六十六条，被深圳罗湖警方处以行政拘留十五日的处罚。
Simon Cheng was placed under a 15-day administrative detention by police in Shenzhen for violating Article 66 of the Public Security Administration Punishments Law.
郑文杰也对其违法事实供认不讳。警方严格依法办理，并保障了郑文杰的各项合法权益。
The police handled the case in strict compliance with law and guaranteed all his lawful rights and interests.
我提请你注意一下，郑文杰对他的违法事实供认不讳。
I want to draw your attention to the fact that Simon Cheng confessed all his offenses.
问：美国国会众院通过了“香港人权与民主法案”。。
I just want to ask a follow-up question on the bill on Hong Kong passed by the US House of Representatives.
下一步，法案将送交特朗普总统签署。
The next step for this bill is that it will go to Donald Trump in the White House.
中方是否已就此事与白宫直接沟通以阻止该案签署成法？
Has the Chinese side communicated directly with the White House or does it intend to in regards to stopping this bill?
答：我刚才已经说过了，我们强烈谴责并坚决反对美国国会参众两院通过有关涉港法案，并已就此向美方提出了严正交涉。
Like I said in my previous answer, we strongly condemn and firmly oppose the passage of the Hong Kong Human Rights and Democracy Act by the US Senate and House of Representatives. China has made stern representations to the US side.
我们要求美方认清形势,悬崖勒马,不得将该案签署成法。
We urge the US to grasp the situation, pull back before it's too late, and prevent this act from becoming law.
问：关于中日人文交流，你刚才发布王毅国务委员访问日本的消息时说，他将主持中日高级别人文交流磋商机制首次会议。
About cultural and people-to-people exchange between China and Japan. As you announced, State Councilor Wang will chair the first meeting of China-Japan high-level consultation on cultural and people-to-people exchange.
据我所知，今年也是中日青少年交流促进年。
I know this year is also the China-Japan Youth Exchange Promotion Year.
请问你如何评价人文交流在中日两国关系中的作用？
My question is, how do you evaluate such exchange in bilateral relations between China and Japan?
答：在中日两国交往史上，人文交流为推动中日关系的改善和发展发挥了十分独特和重要的作用。
People-to-people exchange has played an unique and important role in the development and improvement of China-Japan relationship.
前不久，“2019中国节”活动在日本东京圆满落幕，活动现场气氛热烈，体验中华文化的日本友人络绎不绝，这从一个侧面再次证明中日两国之间的人文纽带十分紧密。
The 2019 China Festival was concluded just recently in Tokyo, during which many Japanese experienced the Chinese culture with enthusiasm. This testifies to the fact that close ties have been forged between our peoples.
大家可能都还记得1984年中日青年友好联欢活动，当时3000名日本青年访华，在两国关系史上写下了浓墨重彩的一笔。
You may also recall an activity for friendship between the Chinese and Japanese youngsters, during which as many as 3,000 young Japanese men and women visited China in 1984, which was a highlight in our bilateral relations.
今年是中日青少年交流促进年，中日双方已共同商定，将在未来5年内安排3万名青少年实现交流互访。
In this China-Japan Youth Exchange Promotion Year, our two sides have decided to send 30,000 young people to each other's country for cultural exchange and mutual learning in the next 5 years.
作为一衣带水的邻邦，中日两国的人文交流一直广泛而深入。
As close neighbors facing each other across a narrow strip of water, China and Japan have all along enjoyed wide-ranging and in-depth cultural and people-to-people exchange.
2018年，中日两国人员往来达到1200万人次，每周直飞的航班超过1400班，双方结交的友城也超过了250对。
In 2018, 12 million visits were made between our two countries, and every week there were over 1,400 direct flights made between us. China and Japan have more than 250 pairs of sister cities.
可以说，进一步加强双方人文交流，是中日各界人士的共同愿望。
I believe closer cultural and people-to-people ties are what our two peoples aspire for.
正如我刚刚介绍的，此次王毅国务委员访问日本期间的一项重要日程就是与日方共同启动中日高级别人文交流磋商机制并举行首次会议，双方将就推动两国文化、教育、体育、旅游、媒体、影视、地方、妇女、青少年等各领域合作深入交换意见，共同规划2020年交流项目，努力打造一个多元互动、精彩纷呈的人文交流新格局。
As I announced, one important item on State Councilor Wang's agenda during the upcoming visit is to launch the China-Japan high-level consultation on cultural and people-to-people exchange with the Japanese side and co-chair the first meeting of this mechanism. The two sides will discuss collaboration in culture, education, sports, tourism, media, film and TV programs, youth- and women-related programs, as well as sub-national cooperation. We will jointly plan for exchange programs for the year 2020 with a view to a new pattern of cultural and people-to-people exchange featuring diversification and interaction.
中方愿同日方一道，发挥好中日高级别人文交流磋商机制的作用，进一步拉紧两国人文纽带，促进两国民众相知相近相亲，让中日关系更加坚实、更有韧性、更暖人心。
By carrying out the China-Japan high-level consultation on cultural and people-to-people exchange, China is ready to work with Japan to forge closer ties, greater mutual understanding and friendship between our peoples, so that our bilateral relations will be more solid, resilient and heart-warming.
外交部和青海省人民政府将于11月26日下午4:30在外交部南楼举行外交部青海全球推介活动，主题是“新时代的中国：大美青海 从三江源走向世界”。
The Foreign Ministry and the People's Government of Qinghai Province will hold an event to present Qinghai Province in the MFA South Building at 4:30pm on November 26. The event will be themed "China in the New Era: Beautiful Qinghai, from the Source of Three Rivers to the World".
届时，国务委员兼外交部长王毅将出席并致辞，青海省委书记王建军、省长刘宁将分别致辞和推介，外国驻华使节代表将应邀发言并与来宾互动交流。
State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi will attend and address the event. Secretary of the CPC Qinghai Provincial Committee Wang Jianjun and Governor Liu Ning will also deliver speeches to present the province. Foreign diplomats in China are invited to speak at the event and mingle with our guests.
近年来，青海省深入推进三江源生态保护和建设工程，坚持生态保护优先，推动高质量发展、创造高品质生活，取得辉煌成就。
Endowed with the source of three major rivers, Qinghai has devoted a lot of efforts in ecological conservation in recent years. Achievements have been made in advancing high-quality development and life.
此次推介活动将全面展示新中国成立70年来青海经济社会发展取得的重要成就，青海为促进民族团结进步所作贡献及在促进人与自然和谐共生方面取得的主要成果。
In the upcoming event, you will get to know Qinghai's economic growth, social development, ethnic solidarity and harmonious interaction between man and nature in the past seven decades.
此次推介活动将通过讲述青海坚持绿色发展、建设美丽家园的故事，向国际社会展现青海的生态之美、发展之美、和谐之美、幸福之美，为各方深入了解青海、感受青海，拓展合作搭建平台。
Qinghai is a province of green development and beautiful homeland, boasting sound ecology and a happy life style. We hope this event will help people know more about the province and facilitate more cooperation.
欢迎各位记者朋友届时积极前往采访报道此次活动。
You are most welcome to cover this event.
因举办此次推介活动的原因，外交部例行记者会将于11月26日（周二）休会一天，11月27日（周三）恢复。
As we will host this event to present Qinghai, our press conference will be in recess next Tuesday, November 26, and it will be resumed on the next day which is a Wednesday, November 27.
休会期间，外交部发言人办公室照常通过电话、传真、电子邮件和微信等方式接受记者朋友的提问。
During the recess, if you have any questions, you may still reach the MFA Spokesperson's Office via email, fax and WeChat.
2019年11月20日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on November 20, 2019
问：5个多月来，接连不断的大规模违法暴力行径已经将香港推到了极为危险的境地。
Over the past five months or so, we saw continued, large-scale violent incidents in violation of law in Hong Kong, which have put the city in a precarious situation.
当地时间19日，美国会参院不顾中方反对，通过了“香港人权与民主法案”。
On November 19 local time, despite China's opposition, the US Senate passed the Hong Kong Human Rights and Democracy Act.
答：11月19日，美国国会参议院审议通过“香港人权与民主法案”。
On November 19, the US Senate passed the Hong Kong Human Rights and Democracy Act.
这一法案罔顾事实、混淆是非、违反公理，玩弄双重标准，公然插手香港事务，干涉中国内政，严重违反国际法和国际关系基本准则，中方对此表示强烈谴责和坚决反对。
This act neglects facts and truth, applies double standards and interferes in China's internal affairs, including Hong Kong affairs. It is in serious violation of international law and basic norms governing international relations. China strongly condemns and firmly opposes it.
5个多月来，香港持续发生的激进暴力犯罪行为，严重危害公众生命和财产安全，严重践踏法治和社会秩序，严重破坏香港繁荣稳定，严重挑战“一国两制”原则底线。
Over the past five months or so, radical, violent and criminal acts have severely threatened people's safety and property, disrupted rule of law and social order, undermined prosperity and stability in Hong Kong and challenged the bottom line of "one country, two systems".
当前香港面临的根本不是所谓人权和民主问题，而是尽快止暴制乱、维护法制、恢复秩序的问题。
The issue Hong Kong faces is not about human rights or democracy, but about stopping violence and chaos, upholding rule of law and restoring order as soon as possible.
中国中央政府将继续坚定支持香港特区政府依法施政，坚定支持香港警方严正执法，坚定支持香港司法机构依法惩治暴力犯罪分子，保护香港居民生命财产安全，维护香港繁荣稳定。
The central government will continue to firmly support the SAR government in lawfully administering Hong Kong, support the police in enforcing law, and support the judicial organs in punishing violent criminals, protecting the safety and property of citizens and safeguarding prosperity and stability in Hong Kong.
香港回归祖国以来，“一国两制”实践取得举世公认的成功，香港居民享有前所未有的民主权利，依法充分行使各种自由。
Since Hong Kong's return to the motherland, the practice of "one country, two systems" has been proven to be a universally recognized success. Citizens now enjoy democratic rights at an unprecedented level and lawfully exercise their freedoms.
美国国会有关法案全然无视客观事实，全然无视香港居民的福祉，出于不可告人的政治目的，把香港暴力分子大肆打砸烧、无差别地欺凌和攻击无辜市民、强行霸占校园并围攻青年学生、有组织地袭击警察等违法犯罪行径粉饰为追求“人权”与“民主”，其目的就是要为反中乱港的极端势力和暴力分子撑腰打气，破坏香港的繁荣稳定，以实现他们借香港问题阻碍中国发展的险恶图谋。
The act passed by the US Senate remains blind on facts and Hong Kong people's wellbeing. Out of hidden political agenda, this act paints criminal moves as pursuit of human rights and democracy when the truth is violent criminals rampantly smashed facilities, set fire, bullied and attacked innocent civilians indiscriminately, forcibly occupied university campuses, mobbed young students, and assaulted police officers in a premeditated way. The aim is to bolster anti-China, extremist and violent radicals who attempt to disrupt Hong Kong, damage Hong Kong's prosperity and stability, so that they can contain China by maliciously making a fuss out of the Hong Kong issue.
美方这一恶劣行径不仅损害中方利益，也会损害美国自身在香港重要利益。
Such a move will not only undermine China's interests but also the US interests in Hong Kong.
美方任何企图干预中国内政、阻碍中国发展的把戏都不会得逞，到头来只会是枉费心机一场空。
In fact, all those attempts to interfere in China's internal affairs or impede China's development will be in vain.
我要再次强调，香港是中国的香港，香港事务纯属中国内政。
I'd like to stress once again that Hong Kong is part of China, and Hong Kong affairs are China's internal affairs.
我们正告美方认清形势，悬崖勒马，立即采取措施阻止该案成法，立即停止插手香港事务、干涉中国内政，以免引火烧身、自食苦果。
We urge the US to grasp the situation, stop its wrongdoing before it's too late, and immediately take measures to prevent this act from becoming law. The US should immediately stop interfering in China's internal affairs, including Hong Kong affairs, or the negative consequences will boomerang on itself.
如果美方一意孤行，中方必将采取有力措施予以坚决反制，坚定维护国家主权、安全、发展利益。
China will have to take strong countermeasures to defend our national sovereignty, security and development interests if the US continues to make the wrong moves.
问：你刚才提到，如果美国最终通过“香港人权与民主法案”，中方必将予以坚决反制。
You just said that if the US passes this Hong Kong-related act into law, China promises to launch countermeasures.
你能否告知中方的反制措施是什么？
Could you offer some details on what these countermeasures will involve?
答：我刚才已经说过了。我们强烈谴责并坚决反对美国国会参议院通过“香港人权与民主法案”，中方已就此向美方提出了严正交涉。
As I said, we strongly condemn and firmly oppose the passage of the Hong Kong Human Rights and Democracy Act by the US Senate. China has made stern representations to the US side.
美方这一恶劣行径不仅损害中方利益，而且也将损害美方自身在香港的重要利益。
By passing this act, the US will undermine not only China's interests but its own interests in Hong Kong, too.
我们正告美方认清形势，悬崖勒马，立即采取措施阻止该案成法，立即停止插手香港事务，立即停止干涉中国内政。
We urge the US to grasp the situation, stop its wrongdoing before it's too late, and immediately take measures to prevent this act from becoming law. The US should immediately stop interfering in China's internal affairs, including Hong Kong affairs.
如果美方一意孤行，中方必将采取有力措施予以坚决反制。
China will have to take strong countermeasures to defend our national sovereignty, security and development interests if the US is bent on having its own way.
任何人都不要低估中方维护国家主权、安全、发展利益，贯彻“一国两制”方针，维护香港繁荣稳定的坚定决心和坚强意志。
No one should underestimate China's determination to defend its national sovereignty, security and development interests, to implement the "one country, two systems" policy, and to safeguard Hong Kong's prosperity and stability.
问：第一个问题，今天，中国外交部官员就美国国会参院通过“香港人权与民主法案”召见了美国驻华使馆代办。
First, we saw that the foreign ministry has summoned the US charge d'affaires today over the Hong Kong Human Rights and Democracy Act.
从去年开始，中方就涉港问题多少次召见美方官员？第二个问题，据报道，今年8月，深圳警方以嫖娼罪逮捕了英国驻香港总领馆雇员郑文杰（Simon Cheng）。
In the last year, how often has China summoned US officials over Hong Kong issues? Second, the Shenzhen police detained Simon Cheng, a British consulate employee, in August on charges of soliciting prostitutes.
郑对媒体称，中方在审讯过程中对他进行了折磨，并就香港抗议示威情况和英国在其中发挥的作用进行盘问。
He told media today that he was tortured by Chinese authorities as he was interrogated about the Hong Kong protest and the UK's alleged role in it.
这是否属实？英国外交大臣拉布今日称，英方召见了中国驻英大使，对郑在被拘押期间所遭受的“酷刑”感到震惊，对中方违反国际法义务的“野蛮行为”表达愤怒之情，要求中国政府对此展开调查和问责。
Did that happen? The UK Foreign Secretary Raab said today they summoned the Chinese ambassador and were shocked and appalled by the mistreatment he suffered while in Chinese detention, which amounts to torture. They expressed outrage at the brutal and disgraceful treatment of Simon in violation of China's international obligations, expecting the Chinese authorities to investigate and hold those responsible to account.
你对此有何回应？
Do you have any comment?
答：关于第一个问题，今天上午，中国外交部副部长马朝旭召见了美国驻华使馆临时代办，就美国国会参议院审议通过“香港人权与民主法案”提出严正交涉和强烈抗议。
Regarding your first question, Vice Foreign Minister Ma Zhaoxu summoned the charge d'affaires of the US embassy in China this morning. Vice Minister Ma made stern representations and protests to the US side for the passage of the Hong Kong Human Rights and Democracy Act by the US Senate.
中方已经发布了消息。
Press release regarding this meeting has already been issued.
中方就美方近来在涉港问题上的一系列错误言行，已经多次向美方表明我们的严正立场。
China made clear our position to the US many times with regard to its erroneous words and deeds on Hong Kong.
美方对中方的关切是非常清楚的。
The US side is well aware of our concerns.
我们希望美方认真对待中方的严正交涉和严正立场，立即停止不负责任的言行，停止插手香港事务，停止干涉中国内政。
We hope the US will take our representations and protest seriously, stop making irresponsible remarks or moves, and stop interfering in China's internal affairs including Hong Kong affairs.
关于第二个问题，你提到的这起案件不是外交问题。
Regarding your second question, the specific case you mentioned is not a diplomatic issue.
具体情况建议你向办案机关询问。
I would refer you to the authorities handling the case.
根据我掌握的材料，今年8月，中国深圳罗湖公安机关已就郑文杰违法案件对外作过通报。
As I understand, in August, the police of Luohu District, Shenzhen offered some details of the case.
郑因违反《中华人民共和国治安管理处罚法》，被深圳警方处以行政拘留十五日的处罚。
Simon Cheng was placed under a 15-day administrative detention by police in Shenzhen for breaking the Public Security Administration Punishments Law.
郑文杰被行政拘留期间，公安机关依法保障了郑文杰的各项合法权益。郑文杰也对其违法事实供认不讳。
The police guaranteed all his lawful rights and interests when he was under detention and he confessed all his offenses.
关于你刚才提到英国外交大臣对于此事的最新表态，我目前还没有看到，需要去了解核实。
I have yet to see the latest statement by the UK Foreign Secretary you mentioned, and I will check on that.
但我刚才介绍情况时已经说了，今年8月，深圳罗湖公安机关已经对外作过通报，其中明确指出，郑文杰在被行政拘留期间，公安机关依法保障了郑文杰的各项合法权益。郑文杰也对其违法事实供认不讳。
Like I said, in August, the police of Luohu District, Shenzhen offered some statements on the case. They made clear that the police guaranteed all his lawful rights and interests when he was under detention and he confessed all his offenses.
至于英方召见中国驻英国大使，我目前还不掌握有关情况。
As to the UK summoning Chinese ambassador, I'm not aware of that at this point.
但我想英方向中国驻英大使提出交涉、表达关切是不会被接受的。
But the representations and concerns raised by the UK to Chinese ambassador will not be accepted.
中国驻英大使反而会向英方提出交涉，对英方近来在涉港问题上的一系列错误言行表达我们的强烈愤慨和坚决反对。
Instead, the Chinese ambassador will lodge representations to the UK to express our opposition and indignation against their erroneous words and deeds on Hong Kong in recent days.
问：还是关于郑文杰的问题，你刚刚说还没有看到英国外交大臣的表态，并称这不是一个外交问题，但是英方已经召见了中国驻英大使，可见这已经成为了一个外交问题。
Also on the question of the UK's Hong Kong consulate worker Simon Cheng. I understand you have not seen the British foreign secretary's comments and you mentioned that it's not a diplomatic matter. But the Foreign Secretary has summoned the Chinese ambassador to the UK, which I suppose technically makes it a diplomatic matter.
你对此有何评论？英方称郑文杰对于自己遭受“酷刑”的说法是可信的。你如何看待这一说法？
I wonder how you respond to that? And what do you make of the British government's claim that it finds Simon Cheng's allegation of torture to be credible?
答：我刚才已经说过了，英国外交大臣召见中国驻英国大使的情况，包括双方会面的情况，我目前还不掌握。
Like I said, I'm not aware of the news about the UK Foreign Secretary summoning the Chinese ambassador.
但我想，中国驻英大使绝不会接受英方对此案表达的所谓关切和英方的所谓交涉。
But the Chinese ambassador will by no means accept the so-called concerns or representations raised by the UK over this case.
中国驻英大使反而会向英方提出交涉，对英方近来在涉港问题上的一系列错误言行表达我们的强烈愤慨和坚决反对。
Instead, the Chinese ambassador will lodge representations to the UK to express our opposition and indignation.
我们敦促英方谨言慎行，不要再插手香港事务，不要再干涉中国内政，这样做到头来只会损害英方自身的利益。
We urge the UK to exercise prudence and stop meddling in China's internal affairs, including Hong Kong affairs. Otherwise, they would only end up harming their own interests.
问：据报道，19日，俄联邦委员会捍卫国家主权和防止干涉委员会主席克利莫夫发布消息称，中国全国人大代表和俄罗斯议员25日将在北京就防止外部势力干涉主权国家内政的企图进行讨论。
On November 19, head of the Russian Federation Council's Commission on Protecting State Sovereignty and Preventing Foreign Interference Andrei Klimov said in a statement that members of Chinese NPC and Russian State Duma will discuss the prevention of attempted foreign interference in sovereign states' affairs on November 25 in Beijing.
中方能否证实并介绍更多情况？中俄在反对外部干预方面的协作步伐明显加快，这对外发出了什么信号？
Can you confirm that? If that's true, what will be discussed? What signals do China and Russia want to send out given the two countries' recently accelerated collaboration on opposing foreign interference?
答：关于中俄立法机构之间的交往，建议你向中国全国人大去了解。
I'd refer you to the NPC for exchange between Chinese and Russian legislative bodies.
这里我想强调，中俄在维护国家主权与安全、维护社会稳定和秩序、反对外部干预方面有着共同利益和共同诉求。
I want to stress that China and Russia share common interests and aspirations in safeguarding national sovereignty and security, keeping stability and social order and opposing foreign interference.
中俄两国都有信心、有能力坚决抵制任何来自外部的干预，维护国内的稳定与繁荣。
We both have the confidence and capability to keep prosperity and stability at home while rejecting external intervention.
与此同时，当前个别国家一味奉行单边主义，大肆实施霸凌行径，不断粗暴干涉他国内政，给国际局势带来诸多不稳定、不确定因素。
Certain country has added instability and uncertainties to the world by following unilateralism and bullying practices as well as blatantly interfering in other countries' domestic affairs.
中俄作为安理会常任理事国和主要新兴市场国家，也有责任、有义务体现大国担当，肩负起维护世界和平稳定，捍卫国际公平正义的历史使命。
As permanent members of the UN Security Council, major emerging markets, China and Russia have the responsibility and obligation to uphold world peace, stability as well as international fairness and justice, which is also a mission granted to us by history.
未来，我们将根据中俄两国元首达成的重要共识，坚定不移深化中俄新时代全面战略协作伙伴关系，进一步开展交流互鉴，加大相互支持力度，积极开展反干预合作，维护好两国共同利益和地区及世界的和平与安宁。
Following the consensus of our presidents, China and Russia will continue to deepen our comprehensive strategic partnership of coordination for a new era, step up exchange, enhance mutual support, carry out collaboration in countering foreign interference, and safeguard our common interests as well as the peace and tranquility of the region and beyond.
问：我熟悉外交部发言人对中美经贸磋商的一般表态口径。但中国商务部表示，上周末，中美经贸高级别磋商双方牵头人通了电话，双方围绕第一阶段协议的各自核心关切进行了建设性的讨论。
I know what you usually say in response to any trade-war questions, but China's Commerce Ministry said over the weekend the two sides held constructive talks but mentioned concerns in the talks.
你能否透露目前双方各自的核心关切是什么？双方磋商有无新的时间表？
Can you give any details on what those concerns are at the moment and what's the new timeline?
答：你既然都熟悉我的答案了，那我就再给一个你熟悉的回答：关于中美经贸磋商的具体问题，建议你向主管部门询问。
You know what we usually say and here it comes again: I'd like to refer you to the competent authority for the specific issues concerning the trade talks.
记者：没有新的回答？
Follow-up: Can't you surprise us with a new answer today?
答：我还是给你一个你熟悉的回答比较好。
I will just stick to the old one for now.
追问：美国会参院通过涉港法案是否会影响中美经贸磋商进程？
Follow-up: Also the US Senate passed the legislation on Hong Kong.

Will this move impact the ongoing trade talks?
答：我刚才已经说过了，我们强烈谴责并坚决反对美国会参院通过“香港人权与民主法案”，敦促美方立即采取措施阻止该案成法，立即停止插手香港事务，停止干涉中国内政。
Like I said, we strongly condemn and firmly oppose the US Senate passing Hong Kong Human Rights and Democracy Act. We urge the US to immediately take measures to stop the passing of this act into law and stop meddling in China's internal affairs.
关于中美经贸问题，我能告诉你的是，中美双方一直保持着密切沟通。
Regarding the trade issue, what I can tell you is that China and the US remain in close communication.
希望美方能同中方相向而行，在相互尊重、平等互利的基础上，找到妥善解决问题的办法。
We hope the US will work with China to meet each other halfway and find a proper settlement on the basis of mutual respect, equality and mutual benefit.
这恐怕也是你熟悉的回答。
This is also something you are already familiar with, isn't it?
问：据报道，美国联邦调查局周二称，美方早就应该采取更为迅速的行动，制止中国通过招募美研究人员将美实验室数据和知识产权等传输到中国。
The FBI said on Tuesday that it wished it had taken swifter action to stop China from recruiting US-based researchers to steal intellectual property and transfer data from American laboratories.
答：中美两国加强科技交流与合作，符合双方共同利益，也有利于推动科技进步，造福全人类。
The strengthening of science and technology exchange and cooperation between China and the US serves the common interests of both sides and contributes to progress of mankind.
我们敦促美方摒弃冷战思维和零和博弈的过时观念，正确看待并维护中美在科技、人文领域的交流合作，多做有利于增进中美互信与合作的事，要“拉手”而不是“松手”，要“拆墙”而不是“筑墙”。
We urge the US to discard the obsolete cold-war mentality and the zero-sum game mindset and correctly look at and encourage science and technology cooperation and people-to-people exchange. We should do more to enhance mutual trust and cooperation, work hand in hand rather than let go, and tear down walls rather than erect barriers.
另外，美方所谓中方盗窃知识产权的指责完全是不实之词，我们此前已在多个场合对此予以驳斥。我这里就不重复了。
In addition, the so-called US accusations of China's intellectual property theft are totally untrue. We refuted them on many occasions and I won't repeat that.
问：据报道，原定于明天在北京举行的阿人内部会议被推迟。
Reports say that the intra-Afghan talks that were scheduled to start in Beijing tomorrow has been delayed.
你能否告知会议为何被推迟？推迟到什么时候？谁将参加？议题是什么？
Can you give details as to why it has been delayed and offer information on when the talks will begin, who will attend and what will be the key items on the agenda?
答：中方坚定支持“阿人主导、阿人所有”的广泛包容性和平和解进程，支持包括阿政府和塔利班在内的阿富汗国内各派开展建设性对话。
China firmly supports the broad and inclusive peace and reconciliation process that is "Afghan-led, Afghan-owned". We support all parties in the country, including the government and the Taliban, in holding constructive dialogue.
中方愿在尊重阿富汗各方意愿基础上，为阿富汗各方对话交流提供平台，为推进阿富汗和平和解进程提供助力。
We are ready to provide a platform for such dialogue and exchange and to facilitate the peace and reconciliation process on the basis of respecting the will of all parties in the country.
目前中方正就在华举办阿人内部会议同阿富汗有关各方保持沟通。
At present we are in communication with all Afghan parties on holding the intra-Afghan meeting in China.
2019年11月19日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on November 19, 2019
问：据报道，11月18日，美国国务卿蓬佩奥在媒体吹风会上称美对香港政治动乱和暴力加剧表示严重关切。
US Secretary of State Pompeo said at a press briefing on November 18 that the United States is gravely concerned by the deepening political unrest and violence in Hong Kong.
香港特区政府对稳定香港局势负有首要责任，任何一方的暴力行为都不可接受。
The Hong Kong government bears primary responsibility, and violence by any side is unacceptable.
中方须遵守《中英联合声明》中对香港人民自由的承诺。
China must honour its promises of freedoms and liberties to the Hong Kong people as enshrined in the Sino-British Joint Declaration.
答：近期香港暴力违法分子的破坏活动和罪恶行径不断升级，严重危害公众生命和财产安全，严重践踏法治和社会秩序，严重破坏香港繁荣稳定，也严重挑战“一国两制”原则底线，将香港推到了极为危险的境地。
The sabotage and crimes of the violent offenders in Hong Kong have been escalating in recent days, which endanger the safety and destroy property of the citizens, trample on the rule of law and social order, undermine the city's stability and prosperity and challenge the bottom line of "one country, two systems". All this has hurled Hong Kong into a precarious situation.
止暴制乱、恢复秩序是香港当前最紧迫的任务。
The most pressing task at the moment is ending violence and restoring order.
中国中央政府将继续坚定支持特区行政长官带领特区政府依法施政，坚定支持香港警方严正执法，坚定支持香港司法机构依法惩治暴力犯罪分子。
The central government firmly supports the Hong Kong SAR government led by the Chief Executive in governing Hong Kong in accordance with law, the Hong Kong police in strictly enforcing law, and the Hong Kong judiciary in bringing criminals to justice according to law.
香港事务纯属中国内政，任何外国政府、组织和个人都无权干预。
Hong Kong affairs are purely China's internal affairs. No foreign government, organization or individual has the right to interfere.
美方近来多次就涉港问题发声，看似公允，实则暴露出企图插手香港问题的别有用心和对暴力犯罪行为的双重标准。
The US recent remarks on Hong Kong, though dressed up as impartial observations, are in fact a manifestation of their hidden agenda and double standards on violent crimes.
把香港警方正常执法、止暴制乱的努力与激进势力的极端暴力违法行为相提并论、混为一谈，本身就是对法治和人权的亵渎。
It is in itself a travesty of rule of law and human rights to mention the law enforcement to end violence by the police in the same breath as the extreme violent crimes of the radicals.
美方提到《中英联合声明》中所谓中方的承诺，这里我要明确指出，随着1997年香港回归中国，《中英联合声明》中所规定的与英方有关的权利和义务都已全部履行完毕。
The US mentioned China's "promises" in the Sino-British Joint Declaration. I want to state clearly that with Hong Kong's return to China in 1997, the UK's rights and obligations stipulated in the Sino-British Joint Declaration were all completed.
美方没有任何法律依据、也没有任何资格援引《中英联合声明》对香港事务说三道四。
The US has no legal ground, nor is it in a position to invoke the joint declaration to meddle in Hong Kong affairs.
我们敦促美方切实尊重中国主权，停止发表不负责任的言论，停止变相纵容暴力违法行为，停止插手香港事务，停止干涉中国内政。
We urge the US to respect China's sovereignty, stop making irresponsible remarks, stop condoning violent crimes in a disguised manner, stop meddling in China's internal affairs.
我要重申，中国政府维护国家主权、安全、发展利益的决心坚定不移，贯彻“一国两制”方针的决心坚定不移，反对任何外部势力干涉香港事务的决心坚定不移。
I want to stress that the Chinese government is determined to safeguard national sovereignty, security and development interests, implement the "one country, two systems" policy, and oppose any foreign interference in Hong Kong affairs.
问：据报道，11月18日，美国国务卿蓬佩奥宣布以色列在约旦河西岸兴建定居点不违反国际法，表示判定定居点建设活动违反国际法并不能为以色列和巴勒斯坦带来和平。
US Secretary of State Pompeo said on November 18 that the establishment of Israeli civilian settlements is not inconsistent with international law, and that calling the establishment of civilian settlements inconsistent with international law hasn't advanced the cause of peace.
美此举不意味着美在西岸问题上预设立场，不会破坏“两国方案”前景。
The US is not prejudging the ultimate status of the West Bank or undermining the prospect of a "two-state solution".
美无意释放鼓励进一步扩大定居点建设的信号。
This is not a green light for building more settlements.
对于美方表态，以方表示欢迎和赞赏，巴勒斯坦总统府和欧盟发表声明予以反对。
Israel welcomed and appreciated those remarks from the US side, while the Palestinian president's office and the European Union rejected them in their statements.
中方对此有何评论？
I wonder if you could tell us China's position?
答：定居点问题是巴以最终地位谈判的核心议题之一。
The issue of settlements is a major one in negotiations between Palestine and Israel regarding the ultimate status.
联合国安理会第2334号决议明确指出，在巴勒斯坦被占领土包括东耶路撒冷兴建定居点违反国际法。
According to UN Security Council Resolution 2334, it is against international law to establish settlements in the occupied territory of Palestine, including East Jerusalem.
当前巴以局势严峻，中方呼吁美方切实负起责任，发挥建设性作用，避免加剧矛盾对抗，不要为巴勒斯坦问题增添新的复杂因素。
In light of the severe situation between Palestine and Israel, China calls on the US to shoulder its responsibilities, play a constructive role and avoid escalating confrontation or adding new complexity to this issue.
问：据报道，17日，美防长埃斯珀同东盟国家防长举行会晤时称，中国在南海的活动对他国构成威胁，东盟不能允许中方操纵“南海行为准则”。
US Defense Secretary Esper said during a meeting with his ASEAN counterparts on November 17 that China's activities in the South China Sea pose a threat to other countries, and that ASEAN cannot allow China to manipulate the COC.
美军今年在南海进行了25年来最频繁的“自由航行”行动，这对于回应中国南海“军事化”行动尤为重要。
The US military conducted the most frequent "freedom of navigation" operations in the South China Sea this year in 25 years, which is of special significance in the context of China's militarization activities here.
中方对此有何评论？
I wonder if you have a comment on his remarks?
答：长期以来，美国一直在南海问题上煽风点火，挑拨离间，目的就是要搞乱南海局势，破坏地区和平稳定，地区国家对此早已看得清清楚楚。
For quite some time the US has been trying to disrupt peace and stability in the South China Sea by stirring up trouble and creating splits. Countries in the region have been soberly aware of that.
当前，在中国和东盟国家共同努力下，南海局势总体稳定向好，南海的航行自由没有任何问题。
With the joint efforts by China and ASEAN countries, situation in the South China Sea is generally stable and there is no problem at all with freedom of navigation.
在不久前结束的第22次中国—东盟领导人会议上，各方对“南海行为准则”磋商取得的进展表示满意，感到鼓舞。
At the recently-concluded 22nd China-ASEAN Summit, parties were pleased with and inspired by the progress made in COC negotiations.
中方愿意继续同东盟国家一道，排除干扰，相向而行，在平等协商的基础上，按照共同商定的时间表积极推进磋商。
China stands ready to work with ASEAN countries to overcome disturbances and advance the scheduled consultations based on equal-footed consensus.
中国和东盟国家有信心、有智慧、有能力将南海建设成为和平之海、友谊之海、合作之海，维护好地区的和平稳定与长治久安。
China and ASEAN countries have the confidence, wisdom and capability to make the South China Sea a sea of peace, friendship and cooperation, and maintain lasting peace and stability in this region.
但是，树欲静而风不止。
That said, as the Chinese proverb goes, "The tree desires calmness but the wind will not cease".
美方打着“自由航行”的旗号频繁派舰机到南海地区生事，不是闯入他国领海进行挑衅，就是搞联合军演“秀肌肉”，唯恐天下不乱。
Under the pretext of "freedom of navigation", the US frequently sent military vessels and aircraft to this region for provocation in other countries' territorial waters or joint exercises to flex its military muscles.
美方在南海的“横行自由”才是南海局势紧张的根源，美方挑拨域内各国关系，才是对南海和平稳定的威胁。
The US willful trespassing is the cause of tensions in the South China Sea, and its attempt to sow discords is the threat to regional peace and stability.
我们奉劝美方正视当前地区局势积极向好的态势，尊重和支持地区国家维护地区稳定的努力，停止不具建设性、不负责任、不得人心的做法，不要再做地区和平稳定与互利合作的干扰者、破坏者、搅局者。
We urge the US to grasp the positive momentum in the region, respect and support regional countries' effort for stability, and stop making unconstructive, irresponsible and unpopular moves that undermine peace and stability in the South China Sea.
问：昨天，香港特别行政区高等法院裁定《禁止蒙面规例》不符合香港基本法。
Yesterday a Hong Kong court ruled that the mask ban was not compatible with the constitutional order laid down by the Basic Law.
今天早上，中国全国人大常委会法工委发言人就此发表谈话。
Given the statement of the spokesperson of the Legislative Affairs Commission of the NPC Standing Committee this morning, does China have any further plans to issue an interpretation of the Basic Law?
中方是否计划出台关于基本法的解释？如是，这是否会与“一国两制”原则相冲突？
And if so, will this conflict with the "one country, two systems" principle?
答：你应该知道，你问的不是外交问题。
I believe you understand that this is not a diplomatic matter.
我能告诉你的是，中国全国人大常委会法工委发言人和国务院港澳办发言人都已分别就香港法院有关司法复核案判决发表了谈话。
Statements on the ruling of this case were made by spokespersons of the Legislative Affairs Commission of the NPC Standing Committee and the Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office of the State Council.
中国中央政府的立场和态度已经非常明确了。
They have made clear the central government's position on this matter.
问：昨天，美方宣布将华为公司的“临时通用许可证”延长90天。
The US on Monday offered another 90-day license period for Huawei to continue doing business with their US counterparts.
中方是否为华为公司获取有利条件做了美方工作？这个问题是否是中美经贸磋商的一部分？或者是中美达成第一阶段协议的前提条件？
So is the Chinese government doing anything to get any favorable conditions for Huawei? Is this a major discussion point in the trade deal or even a precondition for signing a phase one deal?
答：关于美方将华为的“临时通用许可证”延长的问题，华为公司有关负责人已就此公开作出了回应。
Regarding the extension of the temporary general license, Huawei already gave a response.
中方此前也多次表明过立场。
We also made clear our stance on many occasions previously.
我们敦促美方停止泛化国家安全概念、滥用出口管制措施、对他国特定企业采取歧视性、不公平的做法，停止将经贸问题政治化。
We urge the US to stop abusing the national security concept and export control measures to discriminate against targeted enterprises of other countries and stop politicizing economic and trade issues.
至于你问中方是不是为华为或中国企业寻求有利条件，我可以明确告诉你，我们不要求外国政府给予中国企业特殊优待，我们要求的只是外国政府给予中国企业平等对待，包括华为公司。
You also asked whether the Chinese government did anything to get any favorable conditions for Huawei or other Chinese companies. I can tell you clearly that we do not seek special treatment for Chinese businesses, but only equal treatment for them, Huawei included.
关于中美经贸磋商，不久前，双方的牵头人刚刚通过电话。
As to the China-US trade talks, not long ago, the heads of the two teams had a telephone conversation.
据我了解，双方一直在保持着密切接触。
As I understand, the two sides stay in close contact.
2019年11月18日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on November 18, 2019
问：《纽约时报》16日报道称，其获悉的一批中国内部文件显示，中国在新疆组建“拘禁营”，对穆斯林进行大规模“镇压”。
A New York Times report on November 16 claimed that it obtained China's internal documents showing that China is building "internment camps" and conducting major "clampdown" against Muslims in Xinjiang.
中方对此有何评论？
Do you have any coment on that?
答：中方已多次就涉疆问题作出过回应，我们的立场和政策是一贯的，也是明确的。
We responded many times to Xinjiang-related questions. China's stance and policy is clear and consistent.
新疆事务纯属中国内政。
Xinjiang affairs are purely China's domestic affairs.
涉疆问题不是宗教、民族、人权问题，而是反暴恐和反分裂问题。
The issue Xinjiang faces is not about ethnicity, religion or human rights. Rather, it is about fighting violence, terrorism and separatism.
2015年至今，中方已就新疆反恐去极端化斗争、职业技能教育培训工作等发布了7本白皮书，包括《新疆的职业技能教育培训工作》，有关新疆各方面的问题已经说得清清楚楚、明明白白。
Since 2015, China has released seven white papers on Xinjiang's counter-terrorism and de-radicalization efforts as well as vocational education and training work, which are clear and thorough statements of what happens in Xinjiang.
面对这样的严峻形势，新疆既依法严厉打击暴力恐怖犯罪，又重视开展源头治理，最大限度保障公民的基本人权免遭恐怖主义和极端主义侵害。
Faced with such severe circumstances, Xinjiang lawfully fought those crimes while addressing the root causes and making utmost efforts to protect residents' basic human rights from the harm of terrorism and extremism.
正是因为及时采取一系列预防性反恐和去极端化措施，曾经深受恐怖主义危害的新疆已经3年没有发生暴恐事件，各族人民生命权、健康权、发展权等基本权利得到有效保障。
Thanks to the preventive counter-terrorism and de-radicalization efforts, Xinjiang, a place that once suffered gravely from terrorism, hasn't seen a single violent, terrorist incident over the past three years. People's right to life, health and development and other basic rights have been effectively safeguarded.
新疆各族干部群众衷心拥护政府的反恐维稳举措。
The government's measures have been endorsed by all ethnic groups.
中国打击暴恐分子决不手软，保护人民生命安全全力以赴。
China will show no mercy to violent radicals and terrorists, and will spare no effort to protect people's life and safety.
上千名外国使节、国际组织官员、媒体人士先后访问新疆。他们的共识是，新疆为国际社会反恐去极端化斗争做出了重要贡献，积累了宝贵经验，值得借鉴。
Over 1,000 foreign diplomats, international organization officials and media personnel agreed after visiting Xinjiang that the counter-terrorism and de-radicalization efforts there are an important contribution to the world and valuable experience for all to learn from.
《纽约时报》不仅对上述事实闭目塞听，甚至用移花接木、断章取义的拙劣手法炒作所谓“内部文件”，诬蔑抹黑中国新疆的反恐和去极端化努力，其居心何在？
The New York Times is completely deaf and blind to all those facts. What's worse, it used clumsy patchwork and distortion to hype up the so-called "internal documents" and smear China's counter-terrorism and de-radicalization efforts. What are they up to?
我们会继续坚持办好自己的事情，贯彻落实好我们的治疆政策，继续把新疆发展好、建设好。
We will continue to handle our domestic affairs well. We will continue to implement our Xinjiang policy and ensure the region's sound development.
问：据报道，近日韩国多所大学出现中国留学生撕毁支持香港示威大字报的事件。
Recently Chinese students tore down "pro-Hong Kong protest" posters on university campuses in South Korea.
中国驻韩国使馆发言人日前称，中国青年学生的行为理所应当，也在情理之中。
The spokesperson of the Chinese Embassy in the ROK expressed support by saying that what the young Chinese students did is reasonable and understandable.
使馆发言人发声后，中国留学生撕毁大字报的行为仍在持续。
After the spokesperson's statement was released, the Chinese students have continued to tear down those posters.
答：你已经注意到了中国驻韩国大使馆发言人的表态，但你对表态的解读似乎有一些偏差。
You already noticed the statement of the Chinese Embassy but it seems that you somewhat misinterpreted it.
最近一段时间以来，在外国包括在韩国的一些城市，海外华人华侨和中国留学生通过不同方式表达他们对当前香港局势的关注，表达他们要求维护香港繁荣稳定的愿望，也表达他们维护国家主权的决心。
For a while, overseas Chinese, including Chinese students in South Korea, have expressed in various ways concern over what's happening in Hong Kong, aspiration for Hong Kong's stability and prosperity, and resolve to safeguard China's sovereignty.
我想指出：
Here are some points I must make clear:
第一，他们对妄图分裂国家、抹黑中国形象的言行表示愤慨和反对，这是理所应当的，也是情理之中的。
First, it is totally justifiable and understandable for them to express their indignation and opposition to words and actions that attempt to split the nation and smear China's image.
第二，我们希望海外中国公民能够理性地表达爱国热情，注意保护自身安全。
Second, we also hope overseas Chinese can express their patriotism in a rational way and stay safe.
第三，中国政府一贯要求海外的中国公民遵守当地的法律法规，同时我们也希望有关国家能够尊重和理解海外中国公民的合法活动，保障和维护他们的合法权益。
Third, the Chinese government always asks overseas Chinese to abide by local laws and regulations. At the same time, we hope relevant countries can understand and respect their lawful activities and protect their lawful rights and interests.
当前，包括广大香港同胞在内的14亿中国人民对香港局势最大的诉求就是止暴制乱、恢复秩序，最大的期待就是维护香港的繁荣稳定。
At this point, the biggest appeal of the 1.4 billion Chinese people, including the Hong Kong compatriots, is to stop violence, end chaos and restore order. Their biggest aspiration is to uphold Hong Kong's prosperity and stability.
这是14亿中国人的共同意志。
This is the common will of 1.4 billion Chinese nationals.
问：11月20日，安倍政府将成为日本宪政历史上执政时间最长的政府。
On November 20, the Shinzo Abe administration will become the longest-serving one in Japan's constitutional government.
中方对安倍内阁的外交如何评价？中方希望今后与日方建立怎样的关系？
How do you comment on the cabinet's diplomacy? What kind of relations does China hope to build with Japan?
答：我注意到你提及的有关情况。
I noted what you mentioned.
关于你提的第一个问题，我想日本的老百姓更有发言权。
Regarding your first question, the Japanese people are in a better position to give you an answer.
关于中日关系，我想指出的是，去年以来，在两国领导人的有力政治引领下，中日关系重回正轨并保持良好发展势头。
As to China-Japan relations, I want to point out that since last year, under the strong political guidance of the two leaders, our bilateral relations have returned to the right track and maintained sound momentum of development.
今年6月，习近平主席同安倍首相在大阪成功会晤，双方就构建契合新时代要求的中日关系达成重要共识。
In June this year, President Xi and Prime Minister Abe held a successful meeting in Osaka, reaching important consensus on building a bilateral relationship in keeping with the demand of a new era.
我们希望日方继续坚定奉行积极的对华政策，恪守中日四个政治文件所确定的各项原则，同中方进一步加强良性互动，深化各领域的交流合作，建设性地管控矛盾分歧，推动中日关系持续健康稳定向前发展。
We hope Japan will continue to firmly follow a positive China policy, stay committed to the principles set out in the four political documents, enhance sound interaction, deepen exchange and cooperation across the board, constructively manage and control differences and disputes, and ensure the sustained sound and stable development of China-Japan relations.
问：上周日，中国航母编队过航台湾海峡，美国和日本的军舰尾随。
China sailed a group of carrier ships into the Taiwan Strait on Sunday. The group was trailed by US and Japanese ships.
中国舰艇编队此次过航的目的是什么？中方是否就此与日方或美方进行沟通或合作？
What is the purpose of this operation and has China been in cooperation or communication with US and Japanese counterparts regarding this exercise?
答：我不知道你是否注意到，中国海军新闻发言人已经就此事对外作了表态。
Perhaps you have noticed that the PLA Navy spokesperson already responded to this.
我建议你可以去查阅一下。
I'd refer you to them if you are interested.
这里我想说的是，中国舰艇编队在自己家门口进行正常例行训练，这没有什么可值得大惊小怪的。
But I wonder why is the fuss over a normal and regular exercise of China's fleet at its own doorstep?
同时我也要指出，中方有关活动符合国际法和国际实践。
The relevant activity complies with international law and international practice.
我们要求有关方面停止一切干扰中方正常军事行动的行为。
We urge relevant sides to stop actions that interfere with China's normal military operations.
问：你刚才提到上千名外国使节、国际组织官员、媒体人士先后访问新疆。
You just said that over a thousand diplomats, representatives of international organizations and correspondents have traveled to Xinjiang.
提到数字，请问迄今在教培中心收教学员的总数是多少？目前收教的和已经离开中心的人数是多少？
With regard to numbers about what is happening in Xinjiang right now, how many people have been placed in centers for education and skills training, how many are currently there and how many have left?
答：我刚才已经说过了，中方已发布了7本白皮书，新疆各方面的问题已经说得清清楚楚、明明白白。
Like I said, China has already released seven whitepapers on Xinjiang, all of which provide facts in a clear and thorough manner.
至于你关心的具体问题，建议你向主管方面询问。
As to the specific question you are interested in, you may need to check with the competent authorities.
问：据报道，17日，斯里兰卡选举委员会宣布，前国防和城市发展部常务秘书戈塔巴雅·拉贾帕克萨赢得总统大选。
Sri Lanka's Election Commission reportedly announced on November 17 that former Secretary to the Ministry of Defence & Urban Development Gotabaya Rajapaksa won the presidential election.
答：中方对斯里兰卡顺利举行总统选举，完成国内重大政治议程感到高兴，对戈塔巴雅当选表示衷心祝贺。
China is pleased to see the successful presidential election and the completion of this major domestic political agenda in Sri Lanka and expresses congratulations to Mr. Gotabaya Rajapaksa.
中斯是真诚互助、世代友好的战略合作伙伴。
China and Sri Lanka are strategic cooperative partners with sincere mutual assistance and ever-lasting friendship.
中方愿在相互尊重和平等互利基础上，同斯里兰卡新一届领导人和政府一道，高质量共建“一带一路”，实现中斯关系新的更大发展，为两国和两国人民带来更多实实在在的好处。
On the basis of mutual respect, equality and mutual benefit, China stands ready to work with the new leadership and government of Sri Lanka for high-quality BRI cooperation and greater progress in China-Sri Lanka relations to deliver more tangible benefits to our countries and peoples.
问：上周末，香港示威者和警方冲突升级。
I want to ask a question relating to Hong Kong. Confrontation between protesters and police escalated over the weekend.
我们也看到习近平主席近日就香港问题发表的讲话。
We also saw that President Xi made his remarks on the issues last week.
这是否意味中方在香港问题上的立场发生变化？
Does it signal a change in China's stance on Hong Kong?
答：习近平主席11月14日就香港局势发表了重要讲话，中方已经发布了消息稿。
A readout was already released about President Xi's important statement on Hong Kong on November 14.
习主席的重要讲话精神，我们将坚决贯彻落实。
We will firmly follow through on this important statement.
国务院港澳办发言人、香港中联办负责人上周五已分别就此发表了谈话，你可以查阅。
For your refernce, the spokespersons of the Hong Kong and Macau Affairs Office of the State Council and the Liaison Office of the Central People's Government (LOCPG) of China in the Hong Kong Special Administration Region also issued statements respectively last Friday.
这里我想强调，中国政府维护国家主权、安全、发展利益的决心坚定不移，贯彻“一国两制”方针的决心坚定不移，反对任何外部势力干涉香港事务的决心坚定不移。
Here I want to stress that the Chinese government is determined to safeguard national sovereignty, security and development interests, implement the "one country, two systems" policy, and oppose any foreign interference in Hong Kong affairs.
问：中方一再呼吁香港恢复和平与稳定，但香港警察目前禁止示威者离开一所大学校园，造成紧张局势持续。
China has frequently called for peace and stability in Hong Kong. But at the moment, it appears that police in Hong Kong are preventing protesters from leaving a university campus, which seems to be prolonging a tense situation.
香港警方是否应允许学生离开校园？
Should the police in Hong Kong allow those students to leave?
答：我不知道你是不是一直在密切关注香港局势的发展。
I don't know if you have been closely following the situation in Hong Kong all along.
如果你一直密切关注香港局势的发展，而且不带任何偏见、完全从事实出发，你应该清楚地看到，目前发生在香港的已经不是简单的和平示威了，而是一小撮极端暴力犯罪分子对普通市民的暴行。
If you have done so without bias, you should have seen clearly that what's happening in Hong Kong now is far beyond peaceful demonstration. It is simply violence by a handful of extreme violent criminals against civilians.
他们试图干扰香港社会的正常运转，已经危及公共秩序。
Their disruption to the normal social functioning has put public order in jeopardy.
香港警察完全是在依法保障香港居民的生命和财产安全，维护正常的社会秩序。
The police in Hong Kong are protecting the life and property of Hong Kong residents and maintaining social order lawfully.
我们已经多次说过，香港的当务之急是止暴制乱、恢复秩序。
As we said, the most pressing task in Hong Kong is to stop violence and restore order.
中国中央政府坚定支持特区行政长官带领特区政府依法施政，坚定支持香港警方严正执法，坚定支持香港司法机构依法惩治暴力犯罪分子。
The central government firmly supports the Hong Kong SAR government led by the Chief Executive in governing Hong Kong in accordance with law, the Hong Kong police in strictly enforcing law, and the Hong Kong judiciary in bringing violent criminals to justice according to law.
问：据报道，美国务卿蓬佩奥11月15日发表演讲时再次攻击中国政治制度和内外政策。
US Secretary of State Pompeo once again attacked China's political system and policies in a speech on November 15.
答：一段时间以来，蓬佩奥先生拿着一套老掉牙的剧本，四处拿中国说事，四处给中国抹黑。他的话充满了意识形态的偏见，也充满了对中国历史和中国现状的无知。
Mr. Pompeo has been repeating the well-worn rhetoric to slander China wherever he goes for quite some time, which reveals nothing but his ideological prejudice and ignorance of China's past and present.
他散布的这些谬论与谎言在事实面前根本不值一驳，也会不攻自破。
Such words are not even worth refuting. As time passes, all his fallacies and lies will be proven untrue.
这里我想指出的是，冷战已经结束快30年了。
The Cold War ended almost 30 years ago.
但蓬佩奥先生心中的冷战似乎还未结束。
However, it seems that the Cold War is still haunting Mr. Pompeo.
他仿佛完全被厚厚的历史灰尘层层包裹起来，看不到世界的发展，听不到人民的呼声，也感知不到时代的潮流。
It's almost like he's cocooned in the ash of history, leaving him insulated from the evolvement of the world, the people's aspiration and the changing times.
在这个年代里，用意识形态的偏见和零和博弈的思维竖起对抗之墙，挑拨各方关系，注定徒劳无果，注定没有出路。
In this era, it is simply of no use to drive a wedge between countries or to erect a wall of confrontation out of ideological bias and a zero-sum game mindset. Such attempts will get Mr. Pompeo and his like nowhere.
最后，我要说，我们希望蓬佩奥作为美国的国务卿能够摒弃冷战零和思维，正确看待中国和中美关系，停止喋喋不休的反华聒噪，做一些与其身份相符、促进中美关系发展的事情，而不是相反。
I hope Mr. Pompeo will give up the Cold-War and zero-sum game mindset, stop blabbering about anti-China nonsense and view China and China-US relations in a correct perspective. As the US Secretary of State, he should be doing something good for our bilateral relations befitting his position, instead of what he is doing now.
问：第一个问题，据报道，在英国政府尚未对是否允许华为公司参与英5G网络建设作出决定之际，一些英国电信公司已开始安装华为设备，这招致了一些英国人的不满。
First question, a report said that some of the UK's telecoms companies have been exploiting the UK government's indecision on Huawei and already began installing Huawei kit across the UK's telecoms sector. Some people are unhappy about this.
中方对此有何评论？第二个问题，你刚才批评《纽约时报》涉疆报道，但该报称其掌握的证据来自中国政府的文件。
I wonder what China's comment is? The second question, you criticized earlier the New York Times report on Xinjiang. The New York Times say they used evidence from government documents.
中方是否认为这篇报道不属实？
I would like to know if China believes what it said is untrue?
答：我先回答第二个问题。
I'd like to take your second question first.
2015年至今，中方已就新疆反恐去极端化斗争、职业技能教育培训工作等发布了7本白皮书，有关新疆各方面的问题已经说得清清楚楚、明明白白。
Since 2015, China has issued seven white papers on Xinjiang's counter-terrorism and de-radicalization efforts as well as vocational education and training work, which are thorough statements of what happens in Xinjiang.
中国新疆采取的反恐和去极端化措施取得了显著成效，已经3年没有发生暴恐事件，各族群众衷心拥护政府的政策举措。
Thanks to the preventive counter-terrorism and de-radicalization efforts endorsed by all ethnic groups, Xinjiang hasn't seen a single violent, terrorist incident over the past three years.
新疆持续保持繁荣稳定、民族团结、社会和谐，就是对个别媒体、个别人最有力的回击。
The best response to certain media and individuals is the lasting prosperity, stability, solidarity and harmony in Xinjiang.
关于第一个问题，你提到的具体情况我还不掌握，建议你可以向华为方面去询问。
Regarding your first question, I'll leave that to Huawei as I'm not aware of the details.
我这里可以告诉你的是，华为作为一家中国的私营企业，在英国开展业务已经多年，投资超过了20亿英镑，支撑了2万多个就业岗位，在英国还建立了联合研究中心，积极履行企业的社会责任。
But as a spokesperson of the Foreign Ministry, I could say that Huawei, as a private company, has invested over 2 billion pounds in the UK, created more than 20,000 jobs, set up joint research centers and actively fulfilled its social responsibilities during years of operation in Britain.
我们希望英方能采取客观公正的态度，独立自主地作出符合自身利益的选择，为中国企业提供开放、公平、公正、非歧视的营商环境。这也有利于中国企业继续保持对英国投资的信心和预期。
I hope the UK will make an objective, fair and independent choice that serves its interests, and foster a business environment that is open, fair, just and non-discriminatory for Chinese companies, which I believe will keep up their confidence in investing in Britain.
问：中方是否担心《纽约时报》有关报道会引发更多国际上对中国治疆政策的批评？
Is China concerned at all that the New York Times report will lead to more criticism from politicians overseas?
答：我刚才已经说得很清楚了，新疆持续保持繁荣稳定、民族团结、社会和谐，就是对个别媒体、个别人，包括一些反华势力不良用心和抹黑诬蔑之词最有力的回击。
As I clearly stated, the best response to ill-intentional slanders by some media, individuals and anti-China forces is the lasting prosperity, stability, solidarity and harmony in Xinjiang. You mentioned slanders and rumors.
问：你提到“抹黑诬蔑之词”，你的意思是《纽约时报》的这篇文章内容不属实？
Are you referring to the New York Times' recent report being not authentic?
答：我刚才已经说过了，《纽约时报》对新疆的实际情况闭目塞听，甚至用移花接木、断章取义的拙劣手法炒作所谓“内部文件”诬蔑抹黑中国新疆的反恐和去极端化努力，其居心何在？
As I said, the New York Times remains deaf and blind to facts while smearing China's counter-terrorism and de-radicalization efforts in Xinjiang with so-called "internal documents". What are they up to?
新疆持续保持繁荣稳定、民族团结、社会和谐，就是对这些抹黑诬蔑之词最有力的回击。
I believe the best response to this is Xinjiang's lasting prosperity, stability, solidarity and harmony.
问：还是关于香港。
Another question on Hong Kong.
很多人对香港警方将使用实弹表示忧虑，实际上近来已经有一些这方面的报道。
There are a lot of concerns that the police in Hong Kong are going to use live rounds. There have been reports already of their use in recent days.
另外，一名美方高官上周末谴责香港警方“不合理使用武力”。
A top US official at the weekend condemned the "unjustified use of force" in Hong Kong.
中方对此有何回应？
Does China have a comment on that?
答：中国中央政府坚定支持特区行政长官带领香港特别行政区政府依法施政，坚定支持香港警方严正执法，坚定支持香港司法机构依法惩治暴力犯罪分子。
I'd like to reiterate that the central government firmly supports the Hong Kong SAR government led by the Chief Executive in governing Hong Kong in accordance with law, the Hong Kong police in strictly enforcing law, and the Hong Kong judiciary in bringing violent criminals to justice according to law.
至于个别人对香港的一些攻击和抹黑，我要重申，香港是中国的香港，香港事务纯属中国内政。
As for some people's slanders against Hong Kong, I'd like to remind them that Hong Kong is part of China and Hong Kong affairs are China's domestic affairs.
我们坚决反对任何外国政府、组织和个人干预香港事务，任何人都不要低估中国人民维护国家主权和安全、维护香港繁荣稳定的坚定决心和意志。
We resolutely oppose any interference by foreign governments, organizations or individuals. No one should underestimate the Chinese people's firm determination to defend national sovereignty and security as well as Hong Kong's prosperity and stability.
2019年11月15日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on November 15, 2019
国务院总理李克强将于11月21日在北京同世界银行行长马尔帕斯、国际货币基金组织总裁格奥尔基耶娃、世界贸易组织副总干事沃尔夫、国际劳工组织总干事莱德、经济合作与发展组织秘书长古里亚和金融稳定理事会主席夸尔斯举行第四次圆桌对话会，就全球经济形势与宏观政策协调、以更高水平开放促进中国经济增长、推进全球经济治理改革等问题进行讨论交流。
Premier Li Keqiang of the State Council will hold the fourth Round Table Dialogue in Beijing on November 21 with President of the World Bank Group David Malpass, Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund Kristalina Georgieva, Deputy Director-General of the World Trade Organization Alan Wolff, Director-General of the International Labor Organization Guy Ryder, Secretary-General of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development Angel Gurria and Chairman of the Financial Stability Board Randal Quarles. They will hold discussions on the global economic trends and macro policy coordination, China's economic growth with higher-level opening-up and global economic governance reform.
本次圆桌对话会主题为“促进世界经济开放、稳定、高质量增长”，将聚焦世界经济展望和应对，中国持续推进优化营商环境和更高水平开放，推进全球经济治理改革三大议题进行交流。
Themed "promoting open, steady and high-quality world economic growth", this round table dialogue will focus on world economic outlook and response, China's continued efforts to improve business environment and pursue higher-level opening-up, and reform to global economic governance.
会后，李克强总理和国际经济组织负责人将共同会见记者。
Premier Li and heads of international economic institutions will hold a joint press conference after the meeting.
自2016年以来，“1+6”圆桌对话会至今已成功举办三次，为中国政府与主要国际经济组织加强政策沟通发挥了积极作用。
Since 2016, the "1+6" Round Table Dialogue has been successfully held three times. It has helped the Chinese government and major international economic institutions to strengthen policy communication.
当前全球经济增速放缓，国际形势正在发生复杂深刻变化，不稳定不确定因素明显增加。
At present, world economic growth is slowing down, the international landscape is undergoing complicated and profound changes, and there is a marked increase in destabilizing and uncertain factors.
在此情况下，中方期待与参会各方就共同关心的重大问题深入交流，共同发出坚定支持多边主义，推动完善全球经济治理，促进世界经济强劲、可持续、平衡、包容增长的积极信号。
Against such a backdrop, China looks forward to an in-depth exchange on major issues of shared interest with other parties attending the dialogue. We hope to send out a positive message on supporting multilateralism, improving global economic governance, and promoting strong, sustainable, balanced and inclusive world economic growth.
同时，中方也期待国际组织就中国经济积极建言献策，我们也将持续推进优化营商环境和更高水平对外开放，推动实现高质量发展。
We also hope to get suggestions on China's economy from international organizations. We will also continue to improve business environment and pursue higher-level opening-up to realize high-quality development.
问：金砖国家领导人巴西利亚会晤昨天结束。
The BRICS Brasilia Summit was concluded yesterday.
中方曾表示，许多国家都期待金砖国家为变乱交织的世界局势厘清方向，为忧心忡忡的国际社会注入信心。
China previously noted that countries hoped the BRICS countries would point the way forward in a fast-changing world and boost the confidence of the concerned international community.
中方是否认为此次金砖国家领导人会晤实现了这一目标？
Do you think this BRICS summit has already fulfilled this goal?
答：金砖国家领导人第十一次会晤昨天在巴西利亚成功举行。
The 11th BRICS Summit was successfully concluded in Brasilia yesterday.
五国领导人就金砖国家合作及共同关心的重大国际问题深入交换意见，达成了广泛共识，取得了积极成果。
The leaders of the BRICS countries exchanged views on BRICS cooperation and other major international issues of mutual interest, reaching broad consensus and positive outcomes.
概括起来，此次会晤对外传递出几个明确信号：
To summarize, this summit sent out four clear messages.
第一，传递了弘扬多边主义的积极信号。
First, support to multilateralism.
多边主义的核心要义，是国际上的事应该由大家商量着办，不能由一国或少数几个国家说了算。
International issues must be addressed by all stakeholders through consultation, not by one or a few countries alone. This is what multilateralism is all about.
在此次会晤期间，各方承诺要展现金砖国家的责任担当，带头倡导和践行多边主义，维护以联合国为核心的国际体系，提高新兴市场国家和发展中国家在全球治理中的代表性和发言权，引领全球治理体系变革方向，推动国际秩序朝着更加公正合理的方向发展。
During this summit, parties undertake to demonstrate BRICS countries' sense of responsibility, take a lead in championing and practicing multilateralism, uphold the UN-centered international system, increase the representation and say of emerging markets and developing countries in global governance, and be pacesetters in reforming global governance system and making the international order more equitable and reasonable.
第二，传递了反对保护主义的积极信号。
Second, opposition to protectionism.
各方重申将维护以世贸组织为核心的多边贸易体制，维护公平、公正、非歧视的营商和贸易环境，呼吁所有世贸组织成员避免采取单边主义和保护主义措施。
Parties reiterated that they will uphold the WTO-centered multilateral trading regime and maintain a fair, just and non-discriminatory business environment and call on all WTO members to refrain from taking unilateral and protectionist measures.
各方致力于推动将发展问题置于全球宏观政策框架的核心位置，帮助发展中国家更好地融入全球价值链和产业链，推动建设开放型世界经济。
All parties are committed to making development a core priority in global macro policy framework, to helping developing countries to better integrate into the global value chain and industrial chain, and to building an open world economy.
第三，传递了反对外来干涉的积极信号。
Third, objection to foreign intervention.
各方重申维护联合国宪章宗旨和原则，维护以国际法为基础的国际秩序，支持各国自主选择发展道路，相互尊重主权，反对外来干涉，反对任何违反国际法的行为，强调通过对话解决争端，为维护国际战略安全稳定发挥更大作用。
All parties reaffirmed their commitment to the UN Charter purposes and principles and the international order based on international law, support for countries' independent choice of development path, mutual respect for sovereignty, and opposition to foreign interference and violation of international law. They underscored that disputes should be addressed through dialogue and that they will play a greater role in safeguarding international strategic security and stability.
第四，传递了金砖国家增进团结合作的积极信号。
Fourth, greater solidarity and cooperation within BRICS.
各方展示了金砖国家团结合作、共谋发展的决心，重申将继续发扬开放包容、合作共赢的金砖精神，增进五国传统友谊纽带，加强金砖合作机制，推动经贸财金、政治安全、人文交流“三轮驱动”合作深入发展，促进金砖国家新工业革命伙伴关系取得新进展，助力五国经济实现高质量发展。
All parties demonstrated their resolve to seek common development through joint efforts, reiterated their readiness to build on the BRICS spirit of openness, inclusiveness and win-win cooperation, enhance the five countries' traditional bonds of friendship, strengthen BRICS cooperation mechanisms, deepen cooperation in the three pillar areas, namely economic, trade and financial cooperation, political and security cooperation, and people-to-people exchange, and work for new progress in the BRICS Partnership on New Industrial Revolution and boost the quality economic development of BRICS countries.
此次会晤为处在关键当口的国际形势增添了稳定性，为经历深刻变革的国际体系提供了方向感，为充满忧虑情绪的国际社会注入了正能量，也为不断走深走实的金砖国家合作提供了新动力。
This summit adds stability to the international landscape at a critical juncture, points the way forward for the international system undergoing profound transformation, injects positive energy into the concerned international community and provides new impetus to deepening practical BRICS cooperation.
我们期待金砖国家从巴西利亚再出发，携手同心，打造第二个“金色十年”，为促进世界和平与发展、推动构建人类命运共同体作出新的更大贡献。
We hope BRICS countries will join hands and embark on a second "Golden Decade", making greater contributions to world peace and development and to building a community with a shared future for mankind.
问：美国会某咨询机构发表报告建议称，如果中国政府向香港派遣军队，国会应该暂停香港特殊经济地位。报告还建议美国给予台湾更多支持。
A US congressional advisory body yesterday made some suggestions that Congress should suspend the special economic status of Hong Kong if China decides to send troops in. There were also recommendations for the United States to offer more support to Taiwan.
中方对该报告有何评论？
What is your reaction to this congressional report?
答：你提到的这个委员会一向对华充满偏见，它发表的报告基本上都不以事实为依据。
The committee you mentioned is deeply entrenched in prejudice against China. Its reports are rarely based on facts.
我没有兴趣对报告内容作出评论。
I have no interest in commenting.
问：据报道，在中国被抓的日本北海道大学教授岩谷将已经获释并回国。
According to media reports, the Hokkaido University professor Nobu Iwatani detained in China has been released and returned to Japan.
中方能否披露详细信息？
Could you disclose more details?
答：据了解，今年9月8日，中国国家安全部门现场执法，在岩谷将居住的宾馆内当场查获其搜集的涉及中国国家秘密的资料，并依法对其实施审查。
Based on my information, China's national security authorities seized materials containing China's state secrets gathered by Nobu Iwatani in his hotel during an operation on September 8.
经审查，岩谷交代了此次和过去曾经搜集获取中方大量涉密资料的违法情况，事实清楚、证据确凿，其行为已涉嫌违反《中华人民共和国刑法》、《中华人民共和国反间谍法》。
A legal investigation was then conducted, during which he confessed how he gathered a large amount of materials containing state secrets on China, including those seized in the operation and others obtained earlier. The facts are clear and the evidence beyond doubt. His behavior has violated China's Criminal Law and Counter-espionage Law.
岩谷对自己涉嫌违法犯罪行为供认不讳，表示悔过并愿意认罪伏法。
He has pleaded guilty to his criminal acts, expressed remorse and was willing to get punishment.
中方依据有关法律规定，对岩谷进行了教育训诫，责令具结悔过，并决定对其采取取保候审措施。
Pursuant to relevant legal provisions, the Chinese side admonished him, ordered him to repent in writing and decided to release him on bail.
岩谷已经于今天离境回国。
He has left China for Japan today.
需要指出的是，岩谷接受审查期间，中方严格按照《维也纳领事关系公约》、《中日领事协定》及相关法律规定，及时向日本驻华使馆进行通报并安排了领事探视，充分保障了岩谷作为犯罪嫌疑人的合法权利。
I want to point out that during the investigation, in strict accordance with the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations, the Consular Agreement on Consular Relations between China and Japan, and relevant legal provisions, the Chinese side notified the Japanese embassy in China timely and arranged consular visits, fully guaranteeing his lawful rights as a criminal suspect.
问：据报道，昨天，印度防长辛格访问了位于“阿邦”的达旺地区。
According to media reports, Indian Defense Minister Singh visited Tawang in "Arunachal Pradesh" yesterday.
答：中国政府从不承认所谓“阿鲁纳恰尔邦”，我们坚决反对印度领导人和高官赴该地区活动。
The Chinese government never ever recognizes the so-called "Arunachal Pradesh". We firmly oppose Indian leaders' and senior officials' activities there.
中方敦促印方尊重中方利益和关切，停止采取任何使边界问题复杂化的举动，以实际行动维护边境地区的和平与安宁。
We urge the Indian side to respect China's interests and concerns, stop taking any moves that may complicate the boundary issue, and maintain peace and tranquility in the border region with concrete actions.
问：中国国家主席此次出访期间会不会过境西班牙并会见西方领导人？
Is the Chinese president going to make a stopover in Spain and meet any Spanish authorities there?
答：关于习近平主席此次出访的情况，中方已经及时发布了消息，我这里没有进一步的补充。
We have released information on President Xi's visit. I don't have anything to update you at this moment.
至于中西关系，当前中西关系发展势头良好，双方高层交往频繁，政治互信牢固。
As to China-Spain relations, there is a good momentum with frequent high-level exchange and solid political mutual trust.
去年底，习近平主席对西班牙进行国事访问，掀开两国关系新篇章。
President Xi's state visit to Spain at the end of last year opened up a new chapter in bilateral relations.
中方高度重视同西班牙的关系，愿与西方共同努力，落实两国领导人达成的重要共识，加强在“一带一路”框架下的发展战略对接和各领域务实合作，推动中西全面战略伙伴关系取得更大发展。
China attaches high importance to relations with Spain and stands ready to work together with Spain to carry out our leaders' important consensus, strengthen coordination of development strategies and practical cooperation under the BRI framework, and realize greater progress in the China-Spain comprehensive strategic partnership.
问：在外流亡数年的前反对派领袖森朗西威胁将于近日返回柬埔寨。柬首相洪森担忧他此举可能引发政变。
Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Sen has expressed worries of a coup in his country with a main opposition leader Sam Rainsy threatening to return home after years of exile.
许多国家希望柬埔寨允许森回国并恢复民主。
Many countries have called on Cambodia to allow Sam Rainsy back into the country to restore democracy.
中方对此有何评论？
What is China's response to this?
答：我们注意到有关报道。
We note relevant reports.
这件事是柬埔寨内政，中方一贯秉持不干涉他国内政原则，相信柬埔寨政府和人民有智慧有能力处理好自己的问题。
This is Cambodia's internal affair, and China is committed to the principle of non-interference in other country's internal affairs. We believe the Cambodian government and people have the wisdom and capability to properly handle domestic issues.
作为柬埔寨的好朋友，我们希望看到柬埔寨民族团结、和平稳定、经济发展、民生改善，相信这符合广大柬埔寨人民的根本和长远利益。
As a good friend, China hopes to see a peaceful and stable Cambodia with ethnic unity, economic progress and improved livelihood. We believe this serves the fundamental and long-term interests of the Cambodian people.
问：据报道，香港特区政府律政司司长郑若骅11月14日在英国伦敦出席活动时遭到蒙面人围攻，被人推倒受伤。
Hong Kong Secretary for Justice Teresa Cheng was mobbed by a group of masked persons when attending an event in London on November 14. She sustained injury after being pushed and falling to the ground.
你对此有何评论？
Do you have any comment?
答：我们对香港特区政府律政司司长郑若骅在英国遭反中乱港分子围攻受伤一事表示强烈愤慨和严厉谴责。
We deplore and condemn the attack against Hong Kong SAR Secretary for Justice Teresa Cheng in London by a group of anti-China elements seeking to disrupt Hong Kong.
中国驻英国使馆第一时间派人赶赴现场进行处置、提供协助，并要求英方立即为郑若骅司长提供安全保护。
The Chinese embassy in the UK immediately sent personnel to the scene to provide assistance and asked the British side to immediately arrange for security measures for Secretary Cheng.
中国驻英大使刘晓明也将前往医院探望郑若骅司长。
Ambassador Liu Xiaoming will be visiting her in the hospital where she is receiving treatment for the injuries.
事实证明，反中乱港分子完全是一群暴力违法之徒，他们的所作所为已经突破了法律底线和文明底线。
Facts have proven that the anti-China elements seeking to disrupt Hong Kong are nothing but a group of violent criminals who have crossed the line of law and society.
这种明目张胆袭击伤害香港特区政府官员的行径必须得到制止和严惩。
Such blatant attacks against Hong Kong SAR government officials must be stopped and severely punished.
如果任由反中乱港分子胡作非为，不仅将严重破坏香港的繁荣稳定，也必将给包括英国在内的国际社会带来严重的干扰和破坏。
If allowed to have their way, they would seriously undermine Hong Kong's stability and prosperity and cause severe disruption and damage to the international community, the UK included.
这里我要指出，这起骇人听闻的袭击香港特区政府高官事件发生在英国，与一段时间以来英方一些政要在涉港问题上是非不分、颠倒黑白，明里暗里为暴力违法行为张目，为反中乱港分子站台有直接关系。
I need to point out that this appalling attack happening in London is an immediate result of some UK politicians' behavior for a while. They confuse right and wrong, endorse the anti-China elements seeking to destabilize Hong Kong and support their violent and criminal actions overtly or covertly.
如果英方不改变其错误做法，继续火上浇油、推波助澜，必将遭到反噬，贻害自身。
If the UK doesn't change its wrong course and continues to add fuel to the flames, it will end up getting burned itself.
我们要求英方立即彻查这起事件，全力抓捕凶徒，将肇事者绳之以法，切实保护所有中国在英人员的人身安全与尊严。
We demand that the UK immediately launch a thorough investigation into this incident, spare no effort to apprehend the culprits, bring them to justice, and ensure the safety and dignity of all Chinese in the UK.
同时，我们敦促英方在涉港问题上要谨言慎行，不要再发出错误信号，不要再挑拨怂恿，不要再插手香港事务，不要再干涉中国内政。
We urge the UK to exercise prudence on Hong Kong-related issues, stop sending wrong messages, stop discord-sowing and instigation, and stop meddling in Hong Kong affairs which are China's internal affairs.
最后，我要重申，止暴制乱、恢复秩序是当前香港最紧迫的任务，也是香港社会各界最广泛的共识和最强烈的呼声。
I must stress once again that ending violence and restoring order is the most pressing task, the broadest consensus and the strongest appeal in Hong Kong at this point.
中国中央政府将继续坚定支持行政长官带领香港特区政府依法施政，坚定支持香港警方严正执法，坚定支持香港司法机构依法惩治暴力犯罪分子。
The central government firmly supports the Hong Kong SAR government led by the Chief Executive in governing Hong Kong in accordance with law, the Hong Kong police in strictly enforcing law, and the Hong Kong judiciary in bringing violent criminals to justice according to law.
问：阿富汗媒体援引阿政府方面消息称，阿人内部会议下周将在北京举行。
Afghan media citing sources from the Afghan government said that intra-Afghan peace talks will be held in Beijing next week.
中方能否证实？
Could you confirm this?
答：这个问题我其实已经回答过多次了。
I responded to similar questions several times.
中方坚定支持“阿人主导、阿人所有”的广泛包容性和平和解进程，支持包括阿政府和塔利班在内的阿国内各派开展建设性对话。
China firmly supports the broad and inclusive peace and reconciliation process that is "Afghan-led, Afghan-owned". We support all parties in the country, including the government and the Taliban, in holding constructive dialogue.
中方愿在尊重阿各方意愿基础上，为阿各方对话交流提供平台，为推进阿和平和解进程提供助力。
We are ready to provide a platform for such dialogue and exchange and to facilitate the peace and reconciliation process on the basis of respecting the will of all parties in the country.
目前中方正就在华举办阿人内部会议同阿有关各方保持沟通。
At present we are in communication with all Afghan parties on holding the intra-Afghan meeting in China.
2019年11月14日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on November 14, 2019
问：澳大利亚政府昨天宣布了指导澳高校应对外国干涉的纲要。
The Australian government announced new guidelines yesterday to guard its universities against foreign interference.
考虑到近期澳国内关于“中国影响力”的讨论，中方是否担心这将影响中澳学术合作？
Are you concerned that this could affect China's academic collaboration in that country considering the recent discussion in Australia about Chinese influence?
答：澳大利亚政府出台有关教育政策是澳内政，我们不予置评。
The Australian government's adoption of relevant education policies is the country's internal affair, which we don't comment on.
同时，我们希望澳方在开展海外教育合作过程中秉持公平、透明、非歧视原则，对各方一视同仁。
It is our hope that the Australian side will adhere to the principle of fairness, transparency and non-discrimination, and ensure equal treatment in conducting external education cooperation.
这里我还想指出，中澳双方在教育领域建立了长期合作关系，为两国学生求学深造提供了极大便利，也为增进两国人民相互了解发挥了重要作用。
I would also like to point out that the long-term cooperative relations between China and Australia in the education sector have greatly facilitated student exchange between the two countries, and contributed greatly to our peoples' mutual understanding.
所谓中国对澳大利亚高校“渗透”纯属无稽之谈，我们此前在记者会上曾经多次作出过回应。
The so-called Chinese "infiltration" into Australian higher learning institutions is pure hearsay. We have repeatedly responded to that at our press conferences.
我们希望有关方面能够客观、理性地看待双方的交流，不要将正常的交流项目政治化，多做有利于中澳友好与互信的事。
We hope the relevant side could view bilateral exchange from an objective and rational perspective and work to enhance China-Australia friendship and mutual trust instead of politicizing normal exchange programs.
问：知情人士称，美国全国制造商协会（NAM）今年早些时候遭疑似来自中国的黑客攻击，该协会参与制定美政府贸易政策。
People familiar with the matter said that earlier this year, suspected Chinese hackers broke into an industry group in the United States called the National Association of Manufacturers, which has helped to shape some of the government's trade policies.
中方有何评论？
Do you have a comment on these allegations?
答：我注意到有关报道。
I note the report.
同时，我也注意到有关报道用的都是“推断”、“疑似”这种模棱两可、似是而非的话语，纯属无中生有，别有用心。
As we can see, many vague and ambiguous words like "suspected" and "suspicious" are used in the report, a clear indicator that the allegation is nothing but fabrications with ulterior motives.
这里我想强调，中国是网络安全的坚定维护者。
I would like to stress that China is a staunch defender of cyber security.
我们坚决反对并依法打击各种形式的网络攻击、网络窃密行为。
We firmly oppose and fight all forms of cyber attacks or cyber theft of secrets according to law.
我们敦促有关方面停止借网络安全问题抹黑中国。
We urge relevant sides to stop smearing China with cyber security issues.
问：美韩将于11月中旬举行联合军演，朝鲜方面昨天警告称，如美执意推进军演将面临严重后果。
The United States and the ROK plan to hold military drills in mid-November. Last night, the DPRK warned that the US will face a greater threat and harsh suffering if it goes ahead with the scheduled drills.
中方对此有何评论？
What is China's position on this situation?
答：我们注意到了有关情况。
We note the developments.
对话始终是推动半岛问题政治解决的唯一有效手段。
Dialogue is the only viable way to achieve political settlement of the Korean Peninsula issue.
我们呼吁各方珍惜来之不易的对话缓和局面，坚定致力于对话磋商，相互显示灵活，多做有利于增进互信的事，为推动半岛无核化和持久和平作出建设性努力。
We call on all parties to cherish the hard-won momentum for dialogue and amelioration, stay committed to dialogue and consultation, show flexibility, enhance mutual trust and work constructively towards denuclearization and enduring peace on the Peninsula.
问：根据联合国安理会有关决议，各国应在12月22日前遣返朝鲜海外劳工。
The UN Security Council resolutions require repatriation of all overseas DPRK workers by December 22.
如果严格执行该决议，朝鲜方面可能作出强烈反应。
If the sanction is enforced strictly, Pyongyang would likely react sharply.
作为朝鲜最亲密的伙伴，中方是否会严格执行？
China is the DPRK's closest partner. Does the Chinese government implement the sanction as scheduled?
答：我们以前多次回答过类似问题。
As we have stated repeatedly when responding to similar questions, China earnestly implements UN Security Council resolutions and fulfills its international obligations.
中方一贯认真执行安理会有关决议，履行自身承担的国际义务，会按照相关决议规定处理有关问题。
We will handle relevant issues in accordance with provisions of relevant resolutions.
问：法国、德国、英国和欧盟方面周一表示，伊朗应继续遵守2015年签署的伊朗核问题全面协议，否则可能重启对伊制裁。
The European Union along with France, Germany and Britain on Monday urged Iran to continue to abide by the 2015 nuclear agreement or face action which could include reimposing sanctions.
中方是否支持对伊重启制裁？是否与俄罗斯和欧洲方面有过沟通？
Would China support reimposing sanctions? And has China discussed this specific issue with Russia or the European signatories to the agreement?
答：据我了解，在11日发表的联合声明中，欧方并未表示要重启对伊制裁。
To my knowledge, in the joint statement issued on November 11, the European side didn't state they would reimpose sanctions on Iran.
同时作为原则，中方始终主张，动辄制裁或以制裁相威胁不具建设性，也解决不了问题，对话、谈判才是解决问题的真正出路。
Besides, it is China's consistent position that the wanton use or threat of sanctions is neither constructive nor helpful for any settlement. Dialogue and negotiation is the real way out.
最近几天我已就伊核问题多次作过表态。
I responded to many questions relating to Iran recently.
这里我愿重申，中方始终认为，美国单方面退出伊核问题全面协议、对伊朗实施极限施压，是当前伊核危机的根源。
I would reiterate that it is China's consistent belief that the US unilateral withdrawal from the JCPOA and maximum pressure campaign against Iran are the root cause of the current crisis.
美方应放弃上述错误做法，为外交努力留出空间，为缓和局势创造条件。
The US should quit such wrong behavior to make room for diplomatic efforts and create conditions for de-escalation.
同时，包括欧方和伊方在内的协议各方都要保持克制，致力于完整、有效执行全面协议，坚持在全面协议框架内化解分歧，推动伊核问题的全面政治外交解决。
In the meantime, parties including the European side and Iran should exercise restraint, remain committed to full and effective implementation of the agreement, resolve differences within the JCPOA framework and work for the political and diplomatic settlement of the Iranian nuclear issue.
至于你关心的中方与俄罗斯以及欧方接触的问题，我可以告诉你，中方与俄罗斯方面及欧方一直就伊核问题保持着密切沟通。
As to whether China is in contact with Russia and the European side, I can tell you that China stays in close communication with them on the Iranian nuclear issue.
问：昨晚中美贸易副代表级别的官员是否就中美经贸磋商的棘手问题进行了通话？如果有，通话讨论了什么内容？
Was there a deputy-level phone call last night D.C. time on sticking points in trade talks? If so, what was discussed?
答：你的同事是不是正在商务部的记者会上？（记者点头）
Your colleague is at the press conference in the Commerce Ministry now, right?
我们多次说过，关于中美经贸磋商的具体问题，请你还是向商务部询问。
Like we repeatedly said, you may need to ask the Commerce Ministry for details of the China-US trade talks.
问：下周将在布鲁塞尔举行一个关于稀土的会议。
There's a meeting in Brussels next week on the issue of rare earths.
考虑到该会议可能集中讨论西方国家所担心的中方垄断稀土市场的问题，你对会议有何评论？
Do you have any comment on this meeting, which is probably going to focus very strongly on China's dominance over rare earths, a concern in Western countries?
答：你提到的这个会议我还没有听说，需要去了解一下，所以这里我只能给你一个原则的回应。
I haven't heard about this meeting you mentioned and will need to ask for more information. I can only give you a principled response now.
我们生活在全球化的时代，全球产业链条紧密相连，环环相扣。在这种情况下，主导、垄断某一个领域或者市场，或者人为地将某一节链条切除或者排除出去，都是行不通的。
In today's world of globalization where industrial chains are intricately entwined, attempts to dominate or monopolize a certain field or market and artificially sever or exclude a specific link will only lead to dead ends.
中国是全球稀土第一储量大国，也是第一生产大国，在全球稀土产业链中占有重要位置。
China has the world's largest reserve of rare earths and is the biggest producer of it, which makes China important in the global rare-earth industrial chain.
中国一直秉持开放、协同、共享的方针，推动国内稀土产业的发展，我们愿意以稀土资源和产品满足世界各国发展的正当需要，为促进中国经济和世界经济的发展发挥积极作用。
Following the principle of openness, collaboration and shared benefits, China has been developing its domestic rare-earth industry and stands ready to meet legitimate needs of other countries with rare-earth resources and products, thus contributing to promoting economic growth at home and abroad.
2019年11月13日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on November 13, 2019
问：美国参院外委会主席昨天说，希望参院通过支持香港示威者的法案，请问中方对此有何评论？
The Chairman of the US Senate Foreign Relations Committee said yesterday that he wants the Senate to pass legislation to support the protesters in Hong Kong. Do you have any comment?
答：中方已经多次就美国国会审议有关涉港法案表明严正立场，我们也已经向美方提出了严正交涉。
We stated our solemn position repeatedly on deliberations over the Hong Kong-related acts in the US Congress. We have also lodged solemn representations to the US side.
我愿再次强调，当前香港面临的根本不是所谓的人权、民主问题，而是尽快止暴制乱、恢复秩序、维护法治的问题。
I want to stress again that the issue Hong Kong faces is not about "human rights" or "democracy", but about ending violence and chaos, restoring order and upholding rule of law.
这位美国国会议员对香港示威者大肆打砸烧视而不见，公然为香港的激进势力和暴力分子张目，其目的就是要破坏香港繁荣稳定，以此牵制中国的发展，中方对此表示坚决反对。
The US Congressman, turning a blind eye to the Hong Kong protesters' flagrant offenses including beating people, smashing properties and setting fire, openly bolstered radical forces and violent criminals. The aim is to undermine Hong Kong's stability and prosperity and to contain China's development. China firmly opposes that.
美国在香港也有重要利益。
The US has significant interests in Hong Kong, too.
如有关法案最终成法，不仅将损害中方利益，损害中美关系，也将严重损害美国自身的利益。
If the relevant bills were to become law, not only would Chinese interests and bilateral relations be harmed, US interests would also be severely hurt.
对于美方的错误做法，中方必将采取有力的措施坚决予以反制，坚定地维护自身主权、安全、发展利益。
China will take strong countermeasures in response to any wrong US decision. We will resolutely uphold our own sovereignty, security and development interests.
我要重申，香港是中国的香港，香港事务纯属中国内政，不容任何外部势力干预。
I reiterate, Hong Kong is China's Hong Kong and Hong Kong affairs are China's internal affairs that allow no foreign interference.
我们奉劝美方认清形势，悬崖勒马，立即停止推动审议有关的涉港法案，立即停止支持暴力违法行为，立即停止利用香港问题干涉中国内政。
We urge the US to clearly assess the situation and pull back before it's too late. The US side must immediately stop pushing the relevant bills, stop supporting violent offenses, and stop using Hong Kong to interfere in China's domestic affairs.
问：还是关于香港的问题。
Also related to Hong Kong.
欧盟方面昨天呼吁对暴力、使用武力和抗议活动的根源进行全面调查。
The EU yesterday called for a comprehensive inquiry into the violence, use of force and the root causes of the protests.
答：关于近日香港暴力违法分子的破坏行动和他们的罪恶行径，国务院港澳办、香港中联办和特区行政长官都已经作出了回应。
The Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office of the State Council, the Liaison Office of the Central People's Government in the Hong Kong SAR, and the Chief Executive of the SAR all responded to the latest disruptive activities and criminal acts by violent offenders in Hong Kong.
接连不断的大规模暴力违法行径，已经将香港推到了极为危险的境地。
The incessant large-scale violent offenses have put Hong Kong in a precarious situation.
林郑月娥行政长官也表示，暴徒的行为已经远远超出所谓诉求，而是与民为敌。
As Chief Executive Carrie Lam stated, the rioters' behaviors have gone far beyond their so-called demands. They are becoming enemy of the people.
这里我要再次强调，香港的当务之急是止暴制乱、恢复秩序。
I want to stress that ending violence and restoring order is the paramount task in Hong Kong at this point.
中国中央政府坚决支持特区政府、警队和司法机构采取有力措施，严惩违法犯罪行为，保护香港居民的生命财产安全，恢复香港的安宁与稳定。
The central government firmly supports the SAR government, police and judicial organ in taking strong measures to bring criminal offenders to justice, protect Hong Kong residents' life and property, and restore tranquility and stability in the SAR.
同时我要重申，香港事务纯属中国内政，任何外国政府、组织和个人都无权干预。
I would also like to reiterate that Hong Kong affairs are purely China's internal affairs where no foreign government, organization or individual shall interfere.
我们敦促有关方面切实遵守国际法和国际关系基本准则，立即停止发表不负责任言论，停止以任何形式插手香港事务，干涉中国内政。
We urge relevant sides to earnestly abide by international law and basic norms governing international relations, immediately stop making irresponsible remarks, and stop meddling in Hong Kong affairs and China's other domestic affairs.
问：总部位于美国的某“东突”组织昨天称，在新疆发现多个疑似用于关押维吾尔族等少数民族人员的“集中营”。
A US-based "East Turkistan" organization said yesterday that it has documented camps in Xinjiang holding Uighurs and other ethnic minorities.
中方对此有何评论？
Can you comment on this?
答：境外“东突”组织长期从事危害中国国家安全活动，妄图将新疆从中国分裂出去。
"East Turkistan" organizations overseas have long been engaging in activities that undermine China's national security, attempting to split Xinjiang from China.
他们的言论毫无依据。
Their remarks are groundless.
2015年至今，中方已就新疆反恐去极端化斗争、职业技能教育培训工作等发布了7本白皮书，有关新疆各方面的问题已经说得清清楚楚、明明白白。
Since 2015, China has released seven white papers on the counter-terrorism and de-radicalization efforts as well as vocational education and training in Xinjiang, giving a thorough and clear account of relevant issues. The counter-terrorism and de-radicalization measures have worked effectively, with zero violent terrorist incident in the past three years.
中国新疆采取的反恐和去极端化措施取得了显著成效，已经3年没有发生暴恐案件，各族群众衷心拥护政府的政策举措。
The government's policies and measures have gained wholehearted endorsement from people of all ethnic groups.
新疆持续保持繁荣稳定、民族团结、社会和谐有目共睹，一切谎言在事实面前都会不攻自破。
Xinjiang has been enjoying stability, prosperity, ethnic unity and social harmony. That is there for all to see. All lies will crumble before the facts.
2019年11月12日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on November 12, 2019
问：据报道，11日，美政府不具名高官称，美方谴责香港最新暴力事件中不合理使用致命武力的行为，香港警方和市民都有责任降低和避免暴力冲突。
A US official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said on November 11 that the US condemned "unjustified use of deadly force" in the latest Hong Kong violence and that "Hong Kong police and civilians alike have a responsibility to de-escalate and avoid violent confrontations".
英国首相府称，敦促各方保持冷静和克制，英首相支持和平抗议的权利，希香港当局找到解决问题的途径。
British Prime Minister's Office urged all sides to be calm and exercise restraint, saying the Prime Minister supports the right to peaceful protests and they want to see "the Hong Kong authorities agree a path to resolve this situation".
答：对于香港昨天发生的蒙面人袭警被警察击中的事件，香港特区行政长官和香港警方已经作出了回应。
The Chief Executive and police of the Hong Kong SAR have already responded to the incident yesterday where a masked man assaulted the police and was shot.
大家通过视频可以看得很清楚，暴徒袭警在先，警方完全是在依法处置，孰是孰非，一目了然。
If you watch through the video clip, you will see clearly that the rioters assaulted the police first and the officer's response was fully lawful. It cannot be more obvious who was right and who was wrong.
无论在世界任何国家，抢夺警察的枪械，攻击正在执法的警察，威胁正在执法警察的人身安全，都是绝对不被允许的，也必然会受到警方的强力反制。
No matter which country you are in, you will never be allowed to assault police officers on duty, to grab their firearms and to threaten their safety. In addition, such attempts will be dealt with strong police force.
我想问问美国和英国的官员，类似的事件发生在美国和英国时，他们的警察是如何处置的？
I would like to ask US and British officials, how did their police react to similar scenarios?
同样在昨天，在香港还发生了一起暴徒将一名公开表达反对意见的平民点燃的事件，这种令人发指的行为在广大香港市民当中引起了恐慌和担忧。
There is another incident on the very same day in Hong Kong where rioters set ablaze a civilian who publicly expressed a view different from theirs. Such a hair-raising act has caused terror and anxiety among Hong Kong citizens.
如果美英真像他们所称的那样反对暴力、呼吁克制，他们为什么不对这种攻击普通平民的行为予以严厉谴责？
If the US and the UK truly oppose violence and call for restraint as they claim, why aren't they condemning such a heinous attack against a civilian?
发表上述言论的美国政府官员不具名，恐怕是自己都不好意思具名发表这样的言论吧？美英此次的貌似公允再次暴露出他们的是非不分和虚伪面目，他们的口头正义也再次暴露出他们的双重标准和别有用心。
The US official refused to be named. I'm afraid he or she could only utter such remarks under the mask of anonymity. The pretense of impartiality by the US and the UK only reveals how they confuse right and wrong and how hypocritical they are. Such verbal justice exposes their double standards and ulterior motives.
这里我要重申，止暴制乱、恢复秩序是当前香港最重要的任务，也是香港社会各界最广泛的共识和最强烈的呼声。
I must stress once again that ending violence and restoring order is the paramount task, the broadest consensus and the strongest appeal in Hong Kong at this point.
中国中央政府坚定支持香港特区政府依法施政，支持香港警方严正执法、维护社会秩序和保护市民安全。香港事务纯属中国内政，任何外国政府、组织和个人都无权干预。
The central government firmly supports the Hong Kong SAR government in governing Hong Kong in accordance with law and the Hong Kong police in strictly enforcing law, maintaining social order and protecting citizens.
我们敦促美英切实尊重中国主权，在涉港问题上谨言慎行，停止以任何形式插手香港事务、干涉中国内政。
We urge the US and the UK to earnestly respect China's sovereignty, exercise prudence on Hong Kong-related issues and stop meddling in Hong Kong affairs in any means.
问：世界银行昨天表示，将减少对新疆一些学校的贷款，因为之前有报道称上述学校采购铁丝网、防暴设备。
The World Bank said yesterday that it would cut funding to certain schools in Xinjiang in light of a report that says some of the schools have bought barbed wire and body armor.
中方对此有何评论？
Do you have any comment on this decision?
答：你看到世行的声明了吧？我觉得你对世行声明的引述有些片面。
You have read the World Bank statement, right? I'm afraid your citation is rather partial.
近期世行在中方的积极配合下，对新疆职业教育与培训项目开展了实地检查。
With the active collaboration of the Chinese side, the World Bank recently conducted on-site review of the Xinjiang Technical and Vocational Education and Training Project.
检查表明，有关项目不存在不符合世行政策和外媒所炒作的问题。
It has found that the project complies completely with World Bank policies and that the problems certain media claimed are non-existent at all.
事实证明，项目的实施促进了当地的职业教育发展，培养了很多技能型人才。
The facts show that the implementation of the project promoted local vocational education development and cultivated many skilled personnel.
世行的声明比较客观地反映了职教项目的执行情况，讲清了事实，也有力地否定了所谓的指控。
The World Bank statement reflects objectively the implementation of the project by laying out the facts, which is a strong refutation of the so-called allegations.
至于你刚才提到的世行对项目作出调整。我想这些技术性调整都是出于项目实际和实施的需要，是为了便于项目管理，减少监管成本。
Regarding the technical adjustments you mentioned, I believe they are out of practical reasons and aimed at improving management and cutting supervision costs.
世行在声明中说的很清楚，世行方面提议对项目范围进行适当调整，不再执行涉及伙伴学校的相关内容。
As is clearly set out in the statement, at the suggestion of the World Bank, the scope and footprint of the project is being adjusted and the project component that involves the partner schools is being closed.
此前世行方面已经就此同中方进行了协商，双方同意将尽快落实具体的调整方案。
Prior to that, the World Bank had held consultations with the Chinese side and the two agreed to implement the specific adjustments as soon as possible.
这里我要再重申，世行的报告澄清了事实，也明确否定了前期一些媒体所谓的指控。
I want to repeat that the World Bank statement has clarified the truth and very clearly refuted some earlier media allegations.
问：俄罗斯总统助理昨天表示，俄罗斯总统普京将与习主席于12月通过视频连线启动东线对华供气。
The Russian presidential aide said yesterday that, through video link, President Putin and President Xi will jointly initiate the East-Route natural gas pipeline in December.
中方能否确认相关信息？
Can you confirm this?
答：中俄东线天然气管道项目是两国元首亲自商定并关注的中俄能源合作重大战略性项目，对深化两国全方位合作，促进两国利益融合具有重要意义。
The China-Russia East-Route natural gas pipeline, a major strategic project for bilateral energy cooperation, is a project the two presidents agreed on and granted personal attention to. It is of great significance to deepening all-round cooperation between the two countries and advance integration of our interests.
在双方共同努力下，项目预计于今年12月投产通气，届时将举行相关仪式庆祝这一重要项目建成。
With the concerted efforts of the two sides, the project is scheduled to begin operating in December this year. There will be celebratory events to mark this important occasion.
我们会及时发布有关消息，请你保持关注。
We will release information in a timely manner. Please follow up on that.
问：据报道，11日，国际原子能机构（IAEA）发布最新对伊朗监督核查季度报告。
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on November 11 issued its latest quarterly report on verification and monitoring in Iran.
同日，英、法、德外长与欧盟外交与安全政策高级代表发表联合声明，对伊决定重启福尔多核设施铀浓缩活动表达极度关切，表示将考虑包括争端解决机制在内的所有全面协议机制，解决伊履行全面协议义务问题。
On the same day, the foreign ministers of France, the UK and Germany along with the EU's High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy said in a joint statement that they are extremely concerned by Iran's decision to resume uranium enrichment at the Fordow plant and affirmed their readiness to consider all mechanisms in the JCPOA nuclear deal, including the dispute resolution mechanism, to resolve the issues related to Iran's implementation of its commitments.
答：我们注意到国际原子能机构发布的报告以及欧方发表的联合声明。
We noted the IAEA report and the joint statement by the European side.
中方始终认为，美单方面退出伊核问题全面协议、对伊实施极限施压，是造成当前伊核危机的根源。
It is China's consistent belief that the US unilateral withdrawal from the JCPOA and maximum pressure campaign against Iran are the root cause of the current crisis.
与此同时，包括欧、伊在内的协议各方都要保持克制，致力于完整、有效执行全面协议，坚持在全面协议框架内解决分歧。
In the meantime, parties including the European side and Iran should exercise restraint, remain committed to full and effective implementation of the agreement, and resolve differences within the JCPOA framework.
中方支持国际原子能机构客观、公正履行职责，将继续与各方一道，推动伊核问题的政治外交解决。
China supports the IAEA in fulfilling its duty in an objective and impartial manner and will continue to work with other parties for the political and diplomatic settlement of the Iranian nuclear issue.
2019年11月11日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on November 11, 2019
问：中方对玻利维亚总统莫拉莱斯辞职后玻利维亚局势有何评论？
I'd like to know China's opinion about the latest events in Bolivia after the resignation of President Evo Morales.
答：中方注意到玻利维亚国内局势变化。我们希望玻利维亚有关各方在宪法和法律框架内和平解决分歧，尽快恢复社会稳定。
We note the latest developments in Bolivia and hope that relevant parties will peacefully resolve the disputes within the framework of constitution and law and restore social stability at an early date.
问：《中国青年报》今天刊登了美国驻华大使布兰斯塔德撰写的题为《欢迎中国留学生》的文章。
The China Youth Daily published US Ambassador Branstad's article entitled Chinese Students Are Welcome.
答：我看到了布兰斯塔德大使今天在《中国青年报》上发表的文章。
I have read the article by Ambassador Branstad in Today's edition of the China Youth Daily.
作为中美人文交流的重要内容，留学生交流长期以来有力地促进了两国人民之间的沟通和相互了解。
As an important part of China-US people-to-people and cultural exchange, the exchange between students has strongly promoted two peoples' communication and mutual understanding.
特朗普总统和美方高级官员近来也多次表示欢迎中国留学生赴美国留学。
President Trump and senior US officials recently said on multiple occasions that Chinese students are welcome to the US.
我们对此表示欢迎。
We welcome their statements.
与此同时，更重要的是，我们希望美方将有关的积极表态切实落到实处，为两国留学合作创造积极条件，推动中美人文交流不断向前发展。
More importantly, we hope the US side will translate these positive statements into concrete actions and create favorable conditions for cooperation in this area so as to bring bilateral people-to-people and cultural exchange to new heights.
问：某意大利基金会邀请黄之锋近日赴米兰参加活动。
An Italian foundation invited Joshua Wong to an event in Milan.
黄还将赴罗马会见一些意大利政要。
Wong is also expected to meet some Italian politicians in Rome.
答：我还没看到你提到的消息。
I haven't seen the news.
但你提到的这个人的“港独”嘴脸，大家都看得非常清楚。
But this person's evil plotting for "Hong Kong independence" is clearly seen by all.
我想强调，香港事务纯属中国内政。
I need to stress that Hong Kong affairs are purely China's internal affairs.
任何外国政府、组织和个人都无权干预。
No foreign government, organization or individual has the right to interfere.
如果有任何人为“港独”分子的错误言行提供平台，我们都会表示坚决反对。
We firmly oppose any attempts to provide platforms for "Hong Kong independence" forces.
问：据报道，阿富汗政府已完成阿国内参加北京阿人内部会议名单。
The Afghan government has finalized the list of participants attending the intra-Afghan meeting in Beijing.
请问阿人内部会议将于何时举行？中方将在此次会议中发挥什么作用？
When will this meeting be held? What role is China going to play?
答：中方坚定支持“阿人主导、阿人所有”的广泛包容性和平和解进程，支持包括阿政府和塔利班在内的阿国内各派开展建设性对话。
China firmly supports the broad and inclusive process of peace and reconciliation that is "Afghan-led, Afghan-owned". We support the constructive dialogue involving all parties in Afghanistan, including the Afghan government and the Afghan Taliban.
中方愿在尊重阿各方意愿基础上，为阿各方对话交流提供平台，为推进阿和平和解进程提供助力。
We are ready to provide a platform for dialogue and exchange and facilitate the peace and reconciliation process on the basis of respecting the will of all Afghan parties.
目前中方正就在华举办阿人内部会议同阿有关各方保持沟通。
At present we are in communication with all Afghan parties on convening the intra-Afghan meeting in China.
问：据报道，9日，印度总理莫迪在印锡克教徒赴巴基斯坦朝圣特别通道开通仪式上发表电视讲话称，感谢巴基斯坦总理伊姆兰·汗尊重印方感情并予以合作。
Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi thanked Pakistan's Prime Minister Imran Khan in a televised speech on November 9 for the inauguration of a special Sikh corridor for pilgrimage in Pakistan, expressing appreciation for Prime Minister Khan's respect for the sentiments of India and cooperation.
报道称，印方向巴方发出罕见的感激信息。
Reports say it is a rare message of thanks from India to Pakistan.
答：我们注意到有关报道，对印巴之间的良性互动表示欢迎。
We noted the reports and welcome the positive interaction between India and Pakistan.
印度和巴基斯坦都是南亚地区重要国家，两国和睦相处符合双方根本利益，也是国际社会的共同期盼。
India and Pakistan are both important countries in South Asia. Good neighborliness between them meets the fundamental interests of both sides and the shared aspiration of the international community.
我们希望双方继续互释善意，相向而行，通过对话妥善处理分歧，改善关系，共同维护地区的和平稳定。
We hope the two sides will continue to exchange goodwill and meet each other halfway, properly settle differences through dialogue, make efforts to improve relations and jointly uphold regional peace and stability.
问：还是关于黄之锋访问意大利，意大利外长迪马约此前同王毅国务委员兼外长进行了良好的会晤，你是否认为黄之锋访问意大利将影响中意关系。
Again about Joshua Wong's visit to Italy. Do you think his visit could have consequences on bilateral relations between Italy and China, considering the very warm meetings last week between Foreign Minister Luigi Di Maio and China's State Councilor and Minister of Foreign Affairs Wang Yi?
如果是，将会有哪些影响？
And if yes, how?
答：你提到的具体情况，我还需要去进行了解核实。
I may need to check on the specifics you just raised.
我刚才已经明确回应，这个人是彻头彻尾的“港独”分子，我们反对任何外国政府、组织和个人为“港独”言行提供平台。
As I said explicitly, this individual is a plotter for "Hong Kong independence" in and out. We firmly oppose any government, organization or individual to lend platforms to words and deeds for "Hong Kong independence".
在这一点上我们的立场非常明确。
Our position on this cannot be clearer.
问：美国总统特朗普称，并没有同意将取消加征关税作为达成第一阶段经贸协议的条件。
US President Trump said over the weekend that he has not agreed to a tariff roll-back as a condition of a phase one trade agreement.
答：关于中美经贸问题，包括你提到的取消加征关税问题，商务部新闻发言人上周在记者会上已经全面阐述了中方立场。
Regarding the China-US trade issue, including the tariff roll-back you asked about, the Spokesperson of the Ministry of Commerce has stated China's position thoroughly.
我这里没有需要补充的内容。
I have nothing further to update you.
问：近日，美国政府首席技术官克拉齐奥斯在葡萄牙召开的2019年网络峰会上继续劝阻其他国家使用华为设备，并称中国政府5年来一直利用华为电信设备窃取非盟数据。
US chief technology officer Michael Kratsios at the recent 2019 Web Summit in Portugal again tried to dissuade countries from using Huawei equipment, saying that the Chinese government has been transferring data from the African Union's headquarters to China over the past five years using Huawei IT equipment.
答：去年以来，西方媒体多次炒作“中国监听非盟总部”一事。对此，多位非洲国家领导人和非盟委员会主席已公开予以批驳。
Since last year Western media have tried to churn out stories of "Beijing spying on AU headquarters", a rumor that was publicly refuted by many African state leaders and the AU Commission chairperson.
所谓“中国监听非盟总部”纯粹是西方媒体捏造出来的假新闻，早已被非洲朋友扔进“垃圾箱”。
It is nothing but fake news cooked by Western media and has long been thrown into the dustbin by our African friends.
此次美方官员罔顾事实，再次炒作“中方利用华为窃取非盟数据”，完全是别有用心，令人不齿。
This time, the US official again tried to hype up "China using Huawei to steal AU data". It is apparently a despicable ploy driven by ulterior motives.
值得一提的是，美国长期以来一直有计划、有组织地对外国政府、企业和个人进行窃密、监控和监听，这早已是公开的秘密，美方至今还欠世界一个解释。
What is worth mentioning is that the US has long been running a planned and organized campaign of theft of secrets, monitoring and surveillance on foreign governments, businesses and individuals. Those are already open secrets, for which the US still owes the world an explanation.
中非是好朋友、好伙伴、好兄弟。
China and Africa are good friends, partners and brothers.
中国开展对非合作光明磊落，没有私心。
Being upright and aboveboard, China pursues no selfish interests in its cooperation with Africa.
很多非洲国家领导人在中非合作论坛、联合国等各种场合赞赏中非合作的务实高效与成果丰硕，称赞中方是非洲发展振兴最值得信赖的伙伴。
Many African leaders have commended the practical, efficient and fruitful China-Africa cooperation and lauded China as the most trustworthy partner for Africa's development and revitalization on such occasions as the FOCAC and the UN.
我们希望美方端正心态，客观公正地看待中非合作。
We hope the US will correct its mindset and look at China-Africa cooperation in an objective and unbiased manner.
编造谎言、污蔑他人，损害的只能是美方自己的信誉，结果只能是自取其辱。
Fabricating lies to slander others will only harm its own credibility and bring disgrace to itself.
最后我要重申，对于美方的谣言，中方坚决反对，非洲朋友也不会接受。
I want to reiterate that China is firmly opposed to rumor-mongering by the US.
还是那句话，请美方不要高估自己的造谣能力，也不要低估别人的判断能力。
The African people will not accept that either. I'd like to remind the US once again to not overestimate its rumors or underestimate others' judgment.
问：美国国务卿蓬佩奥11月8日在德国柏林发表演讲，再次攻击中国共产党和中国政治制度，声称中国在敏感技术、新一代网络建设等方面采取与民主自由价值观相违背的举措，呼吁其他国家和人民共同对抗采取上述意识形态威胁的政权。
US Secretary of State Pompeo launched a new round of attacks on the Communist Party of China (CPC) and China's political system in a speech delivered in Berlin, Germany on November 8. He alleged that China has taken measures in sensitive technology and the world's next networks that go against the values of democracy and freedom. He called on other countries to stand together to confront regimes that pose such ideological threat.
答：上周五，我已经就蓬佩奥在访问德国期间有关对中国的挑衅性言论表明了中方严正立场。
Last Friday I stated China's solemn position on Mr. Pompeo's provocative remarks in Germany.
大家可以看到，他出于个人政治目的，现在不管走到哪儿，都无端地恶毒攻击中国共产党和中国政府，诬蔑抹黑中国的内外政策，渲染所谓的中国威胁。
As we can see, out of personal political calculations, he has been venomously attacking the CPC and the Chinese government, smearing China's domestic and foreign policies, and playing up the so-called "China threat" narrative wherever he goes.
我们倒要看看，他演戏要演到什么时候？
We are watching curiously how far he intends to carry this farce.
新中国成立70年来，中国共产党领导中国人民实现从站起来、富起来到强起来的历史性飞跃，受到全体中国人民的衷心拥护。
During the past 70 years since the founding of the New China, the CPC has led the Chinese people in realizing the historic leap from finding our feet to building a prosperous and strong country.

It enjoys the wholehearted support of the entire Chinese people.
中国共产党的领导地位是中国特色社会主义最本质的特征，是历史和人民的选择。
Leadership of the CPC is the defining feature of socialism with Chinese characteristics. It is a historical choice made by the Chinese people who have every confidence in their path, theory, system and culture.
中国人民对自己的道路、理论、制度、文化有坚定的自信，将坚定不移沿着中国特色社会主义道路走下去，不断取得新的辉煌！任何人都不要幻想动摇我们的信念、阻挡我们前进的步伐。
We will stay firmly on the path of socialism with Chinese characteristics and strive for new glories. Nobody should dream of shaking our faith and obstructing our progress.
蓬佩奥满脑子冷战思维，妄图否定中国的社会主义制度、挑拨中国共产党和中国人民关系以服务于自己的政治图谋，注定是要失败的。
Mr. Pompeo, with his head full of Cold-War thinking, attempts to negate China's socialist system and sow discord between the CPC and the Chinese people to serve his own political agenda. Such attempts are doomed to fail.
值得警惕的是，一段时间来，美国国内个别人无视21世纪和平发展的时代潮流和开放合作才能推动人类科技进步的规律，将一切技术问题和商业合作都政治化并且泛化为国家安全问题，企图在中外企业之间人为制造意识形态的“幕墙”。
In the 21st century, peace and development is the trend of our times. And as has been proven, progress in science and technology is impossible without openness and cooperation. However, it is alarming how a few individuals in the US have for a while disregarded these facts and politicized technological issues and commercial cooperation by claiming that they are national security issues in an attempt to set up an ideological barrier between domestic and foreign businesses.
美方在没有事实根据的情况下，一再造谣诽谤中国企业，蓄意干扰破坏中国企业的发展和对外合作，损人害己，不仅中方坚决反对，美国和其他国家企业也不会答应。
They have time and again slandered Chinese enterprises without any factual basis and disrupted their development and international cooperation. Such behaviors are detrimental to others and the US itself. China is not alone in firmly opposing this. Businesses from the US and other countries will not accept it, either.
我们要再次敦促蓬佩奥摒弃意识形态偏见和陈旧过时的冷战思维，回归理性，摒弃为了个人政治图谋置中美两国人民利益于不顾的做法，停止喋喋不休的反华言论，做一些与其国务卿身份相符的事。
Again we urge Mr. Pompeo to abandon the ideological prejudice and obsolete Cold-War mentality, return to rationality, stop pursuing his own political gains at the cost of Chinese and American peoples' interests, take a break in his anti-China rattling, and instead do something befitting his position as secretary of state.
问：关于阿人内部会议，塔利班过去拒绝与阿富汗政府和官员对话，我们是否可以认为，塔利班这次已经同意进行对话，而且对话很快将在华举行？
On the intra-Afghan meeting, the Taliban in the past has refused to hold talks with Afghan officials or the Afghan government. So can we presume that the Taliban has agreed to these talks and the talks are soon going to take place here?
答：我刚才已经说过，目前中方正就在华举办阿人内部会议同阿富汗有关各方保持沟通。这里的各方既包括阿富汗政府，也包括塔利班方面。
Like I said, at this point China is in communication with all parties in Afghanistan on convening the intra-Afghan meeting in China, including the Afghan government and the Afghan Taliban.
建议你保持关注。随着时间推移，有些情况自然会变得明朗。
You may follow us for more specifics that will come out in due course.
问：第一，关于习近平主席访问希腊，你能否提供更多信息或评论？第二，美国国务院负责国际宗教自由事务的无任所大使布朗巴克称，希望联合国着手处理达赖喇嘛转世问题，达赖接班人的选择不应由中国政府决定。
First, do you have any information or comments on President Xi's trip to Athens? And second question, the US ambassador-at-large Brownback said that he hoped the UN will take up the issue of the Dalai Lama's succession, which should not be determined by the Chinese government.
答：第一个问题，习近平主席正在对希腊进行国事访问。
On your first question, President Xi Jinping is paying a state visit to Greece.
由于时差等原因，今天的正式活动还没有开始。
Given the time difference, today's official events have not started yet.
有关情况，中方将及时发布消息。请你保持关注。
For more information about this visit, please follow our timely updates.
第二个问题，十四世达赖是打着宗教幌子在境外长期从事反华分裂活动的政治流亡者，中方坚决反对任何外国官方人士同其进行任何形式的接触。
On your second question, the 14th Dalai Lama is a political exile who has long been engaging in anti-China separatist activities overseas using religion as a cover. China firmly opposes any form of contact between foreign officials and him.
活佛转世是藏传佛教特有的传承方式，有固定的宗教仪轨和历史定制。
The reincarnation of Living Buddhas is an institution of succession unique to Tibetan Buddhism and is governed by fixed religious rituals and historical conventions.
中国政府实行宗教信仰自由政策，颁布有《宗教事务条例》和《藏传佛教活佛转世管理办法》等，尊重和保护藏传佛教这一传承方式。
The Chinese government implements the policy of freedom of religious belief. The reincarnation system is respected and protected by Regulations on Religious Affairs and Measures on the Management of the Reincarnation of Living Buddhas.
达赖喇嘛活佛转世系统已经有几百年的历史，十四世达赖本人就是按照宗教仪轨和历史定制寻访认定，报请当时的中央政府批准继位的。
The institution of reincarnation of the Dalai Lama has been in existence for several hundred years. The 14th Dalai Lama himself was found and recognized following religious rituals and historical conventions and his succession was approved by the then central government.
因此，包括达赖喇嘛在内的活佛转世，都应当遵守国家法律、法规，遵循宗教仪轨、历史定制。
Therefore reincarnation of Living Buddhas including the Dalai Lama must comply with Chinese laws and regulations and follow religious rituals and historical conventions.
联合国是各国在平等和相互尊重的基础上促进世界和平与发展，维护国际公平与正义的庄严平台。
The UN is a solemn platform where member countries work to promote world peace and development and uphold international equity and justice on the basis of equality and mutual respect.
美方企图打着宗教信仰自由的旗号，利用联合国平台对中方无端指责、甚至于干涉中国内政，违背《联合国宪章》宗旨和原则，违背国际关系基本准则，注定不会得逞，也注定招致国际社会反对。
The US attempts to use religious freedom as a cover to launch wanton allegations against China and even interfere in China's internal affairs using the UN platform. This goes against the purposes and principles of the UN Charter and basic norms governing international relations. It is doomed to fail and bound to be opposed by the international community.
问：美国防部长埃斯珀下周将在曼谷与中国国务委员兼国防部长魏凤和会面，美方将就搜寻二战时美军士兵遗骸提出加强中美合作的请求。
The US Defense Secretary Mark Esper is meeting Chinese State Councilor and Minister of Defense Wei Fenghe in Bangkok next week. The US said Esper will ask for more Chinese cooperation on repatriating US soldiers' remains from the second World War.
你能否介绍这次会面的消息？
Do you have any details from the Chinese side on this upcoming meeting?
答：关于魏凤和国务委员兼国防部长同美国国防部长会面的问题，建议你向国防部了解。
I'd refer you to the Ministry of National Defense for the meeting between State Councilor and Minister of Defense Wei Fenghe and the US Defense Secretary.
2019年11月8日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on November 8, 2019
应法方邀请，国家副主席王岐山将赴法国出席11月11日至13日举行的第二届巴黎和平论坛。
At the invitation of France, Vice President Wang Qishan will attend the Second Paris Peace Forum from November 11 to 13.
法国是联合国安理会常任理事国和欧盟核心大国。
France is a permanent member of the UN Security Council and core major country of the European Union.
近年来，中法关系持续健康稳定发展，两国高层交往密切，政治互信日益增强，各领域务实合作不断取得新成果。
In recent years, the China-France ties have grown in a steady and sound way with close high-level exchange, ever deeper political mutual trust and outcomes in practical cooperation across the board.
今年是中法建交55周年，习近平主席同马克龙总统年内成功互访，达成了一系列新的战略共识。
This year marks the 55th anniversary of our diplomatic ties. President Xi and President Macron exchanged visitsthis year and reached new strategic consensuses.
王岐山副主席在马克龙总统访华后不久代表中方出席第二届巴黎和平论坛，体现了当前中法关系的高质量、高水平。
Vice President Wang Qishan's attendance at this Paris Peace Forum shortly after President Macron's visit testifies to the high standard and quality of the current China-France relations.
中方愿同法方一道，继续加强战略沟通，深化务实合作，深入落实两国元首共识，推动中法全面战略伙伴关系不断迈上新台阶。
China will join France in stepping up strategic communication, deepening practical cooperation and implementing our leaders' consensus with a view to scaling new heights in our comprehensive strategic partnership.
问：关于中国南海的问题。
A South China Sea question.
本周一名越南高级官员称，希望通过法律途径同中国解决南海争端。
A senior Vietnamese official said this week that Vietnam may consider legal options to resolve its disputes with China in the South China Sea.
请问越方是否已同中方讨论了此事？如果属实，中方是如何回应的？
Has the Vietnamese government discussed this with China? If so, what was China's reaction to it?
答：南海问题的核心是越南等当事国侵占中国南沙群岛有关岛礁产生的领土问题。
The core of the South China Sea issue is territory, a matter related to the occupation of China's Nansha Islands by Vietnam and other countries concerned.
希望越方正视历史事实，恪守两国高层共识，坚持通过对话协商解决分歧，避免采取可能使有关问题复杂化的行动，干扰南海和平稳定和双边关系大局。
I hope the Vietnamese side will face up to the historical fact, keep to our high-level consensus and resolve differences through dialogue and consultation. It needs to avoid taking actions that may complicate matters or undermine peace and stability in the South China Sea as well as our bilateral relations.
问：7日，美国国务卿蓬佩奥在访问德国期间称，考虑到中国共产党带来的挑战，德国的电信网络建设问题变得很复杂。
US Secretary of State Pompeo said during his visit to Germany that German telecommunications network is facing complicated challenges presented by the Chinese Communist Party.
此前，蓬佩奥接受媒体采访时曾表示，我们应该确保世界各国了解与中国共产党相关的风险，以及我们长期以来对此容忍造成的后果。
In previous interviews, he also said that the US needs to make sure the world knows the risks brought by the CPC and the consequences of long-term tolerance.
你对此有何评论？
I wonder if you have a comment on his remarks?
答：蓬佩奥攻击抹黑中国政治制度，渲染所谓中国威胁，充满意识形态偏见和冷战零和博弈思维，中方表示强烈不满和坚决反对。
China deplores and firmly opposes Mr. Pompeo's words that smeared China's political system as well as domestic and foreign policies, hyped up so-called "China threat", and were full of ideological bias and Cold-War, zero-sum game mentalities.
蓬佩奥将中国人民和中国共产党割裂对立，企图挑拨中国人民和中国共产党的关系。
Mr. Pompeo is trying to drive a wedge between the Chinese people and the Communist Party of China (CPC) by severing the bond between them.
我可以明确告诉他，中国的执政党中国共产党，在近百年的奋斗中始终代表和坚定维护中国人民的利益，得到中国人民的深厚信任和衷心拥护。
Let me make it clear: the CPC, as our country's ruling party, has always been representing and defending our people's interests over the past decades, and it has been deeply trusted and warmly endorsed.
企图割裂中国人民和中国共产党的言行，就是对全体中国人民的挑衅，注定不会得逞。
Words and deeds intended to alienate the CPC from the people are considered provocations to all Chinese nationals. They are doomed to fail.
必须指出，蓬佩奥的有关言论十分危险，与其美国国务卿的身份严重不符，充分暴露了他企图通过反华来捞取个人政治资本的险恶用心。
I must point out the fact that Mr. Pompeo's comments are extremely dangerous and unworthy of the US Secretary of State. His words further reveal a sinister intention to gain political capital for himself by taking anti-China moves.
我们奉劝他不要再喋喋不休地对中国进行无端指责，以免搬起石头砸自己的脚。
We urge him to stop badmouthing China. If he continues doing so, the negative effects will only boomerang on himself.
问：第一个问题，美国方面还未对中国商务部昨天有关中美取消关税的声明作出公开回应。
First question, Washington had no public response to China's Commerce Ministry statement yesterday that the two countries agreed to remove tariffs.
请问双方真的就此达成一致了吗？看上去美方似乎还在这个问题上有所犹豫。
How firm was the agreement between the two sides on this? It seems the US side is still hesitant about rolling back tariffs.
一些美国官员指责，中方出于自身利益，试图就第一阶段协议重新谈判，而美方此前只同意取消那些尚未开始加征的关税。
Some in Washington accused China of trying to renegotiate the phase one deal to its advantage and the US previously only agreed to some tariffs that had not yet come into effect.
第二个问题，中方对签署经贸磋商第一阶段协议的时间和地点有何关切？
Second question, what are China's concerns of when and where phase one of the trade deal will be signed?
美国国务卿蓬佩奥暗示，美方将于明年1月举办APEC非正式领导人会议，届时将同中方签署协议。但即便如此，相对于两国原计划在智利APEC会议期间签署协议，还是推迟了。
US Secretary of State Pompeo suggested holding an APEC summit in the US in January but it still delays the original plan to sign that in Chile.
答：关于你提的这些问题，特别是关于中美互相取消关税的问题，在昨天商务部的记者会上，商务部新闻发言人已经作了全面和充分的回应。
On your question especially the part about China and the US rolling back tariffs, I believe spokesperson of the Ministry of Commerce gave a thorough answer yesterday at a press briefing.
我这里没有补充。
I have nothing to update you at the moment.
问：按惯例，金砖国家领导人会晤期间，各方将举办“金砖+”有关活动。但今年即将在巴西举行的金砖国家领导人会晤期间，好像没有相关安排。
The BRICS leaders' summit traditionally holds the BRICS+ meeting where leaders can meet face to face with their regional counterparts but that's not happening at the summit next week.
请问外交部了解具体原因吗？这是否意味着金砖国家失去了一个同拉美地区增进关系的机会？
Does the foreign ministry know why the BRICS+ meeting isn't happening? Do you see that as a lost opportunity to improve the ties in Latin America?
答：金砖机制自成立之初，就同广大新兴市场和发展中国家的命运紧紧联系在一起。
The BRICS mechanism has been all about emerging markets and developing countries ever since it was first established.
加强同其他发展中国家的合作，是金砖国家作为新兴大国的责任，也是我们一直坚持的优良传统。
Cooperation with other developing countries is a tradition as well as a responsibility for us BRICS countries.
2017年中方首创“金砖+”模式，在金砖国家领导人厦门会晤期间举办“新兴市场国家与发展中国家对话会”，首次从全球范围邀请嘉宾国与会，得到各方高度评价。
In 2017, China first proposed BRICS+ cooperation and held the first ever Dialogue of Emerging Market and Developing Countries in Xiamen with guest countries. This innovative approach of cooperation was highly acclaimed.
去年南非延续这一做法，在约翰内斯堡会晤期间继续举办“金砖+”领导人对话会，取得积极效果。
Last year, South Africa held the second BRICS+ dialogue in Johannesburg during the BRICS Summit, which also produced positive effects.
今年我们在很多活动中延续“金砖+”模式，邀请部分新兴市场和发展中国家代表参加，进一步扩大了金砖国家的“朋友圈”，促进了各国共同发展。
We continued to apply this model by inviting representatives from emerging markets and developing countries to many BRICS events this year. BRICS countries are having more friends and contributing to common development of the world.
对于今年金砖合作主席国不在巴西利亚会晤期间举办“金砖+”领导人对话会的决定，中方尊重主席国的安排。
In the meantime, we respect the host country's decision to not hold a BRICS+ dialogue during the BRICS Summit in Brasilia this year.
问：问一个有关APEC的问题。
A question on the APEC meeting.
有报道称，智利取消举办APEC会议后，美国正考虑于明年1月举行APEC会议。
Some say the US is considering holding the APEC summit in January next year after Chile canceled it.
中方对此持何态度？
Does China have a comment on that?
答：关于你询问的事情，我们一直在与有关各方保持沟通，了解情况。
We have been discussing this matter with all relevant parties and getting updated.
作为原则，我们认为，涉及APEC事宜，应尊重东道主的意见，也应遵循协商一致的原则。
As a principle, when it comes to APEC-related affairs, we believe the host country's opinion needs to be respected and all decisions need to be made based on consensus.
问：今天，日本地方议员樱木琢磨被中国法院判处无期徒刑。
Japan's former local lawmaker Takuma Sukuragi was sentenced to life in prison by a Chinese court.
答：今天，广东省广州市中级人民法院依法对有关走私毒品案进行了公开宣判，其中有一名日本籍人士樱木琢磨。
The Guangzhou Intermediate People's Court in Guangdong today heard in public the relevant drug smuggling case.
2013年10月31日，他在广州白云国际机场准备搭乘航班经上海转机回日本时，被安检人员在行李箱拉杆夹层及箱内女式松糕凉鞋内查获甲基苯丙胺，俗称冰毒，3289克。
On October 31, 2013, a Japanese named Takuma Sukuragi was picked up by the security when he was at the Guangzhou Baiyun international airport intending to take a flight back to Japan via Shanghai. The security team found 3,289 grams of methamphetamine (also known as crystal meth) in a hidden interlayer in his suitcase and in the platform shoes inside his luggage.
广州市中级人民法院根据中国法律判处樱木琢磨无期徒刑，并没收个人全部财产。
According to Chinese laws, the Guangzhou Intermediate People's Court sentenced him to life imprisonment and confiscated all his properties.
法院方面已就此发布了消息。
Related information was released by the court.
我补充一句，中方已就此案向日本驻广州总领馆进行了通报。
Regarding this case, China has notified the Japanese Consulate-General in Guangzhou.
不久前，我们隆重庆祝了中华人民共和国70华诞。
Not long ago we celebrated the 70th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China.
今天，我们又迎来了中华人民共和国外交部建部70周年。
Today marks the 70th anniversary of the founding of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
70年前的今天，也就是1949年11月8日，外交部成立大会在北京举行。
Exactly 70 years ago, on November 8, 1949, the Foreign Ministry's inauguration ceremony was held in Beijing.
当时兼任外交部长的周恩来总理出席大会，并在会上作了重要讲话。
The then Premier and Foreign Minister Zhou Enlai attended and addressed the event.
回首过去的70年，在中国共产党的坚强领导下，中国外交披荆斩棘，攻坚克难，风雨兼程，砥砺前行，走过了波澜壮阔的光辉历程，谱写了气势磅礴的壮美华章，取得了举世瞩目的丰硕成果，赢得了国内国外的支持尊重。
The past 70 years witnessed an extraordinary journey with fruitful outcomes and progress in China's diplomacy amid difficulties. Such achievements were made under the leadership of the Communist Party of China and won support and respect from our country and beyond.
70年来，中国外交坚定捍卫国家主权、安全、发展利益，积极服务改革开放进程，全力践行“外交为民”理念，持续推动世界和平发展大业，深刻改变了中国与世界的关系，显著提升了中国的国际地位，为国家发展营造了有利的外部环境。
Over the past 70 years, we have been safeguarding our national sovereignty, security and development interests. We have been making positive efforts in reform and opening up, dedicated to serving the people and contributing to world peace and development.
站在新的历史起点，中国特色大国外交将以习近平外交思想为根本遵循和行动指南，继续高举和平、发展、合作、共赢旗帜，坚持打造全球伙伴关系，积极参与全球治理，为实现中华民族伟大复兴中国梦、推动构建人类命运共同体作出新的贡献。
Our diplomatic achievements have profoundly changed China's role in the world, made China more eminent on the global stage and created favorable external environment for our growth. Standing at a new starting point, we will continue to implement Xi Jinping Thought on diplomacy, remain committed to peace, development, cooperation and win-win spirit, forge global partnerships, participate in global governance, and contribute to the Chinese Dream of national rejuvenation, a new type of international relations and the community with a shared future for mankind.
今天是中国的记者节。在这里我要祝所有中国记者朋友和在华工作生活的外国记者朋友节日快乐!
In China we celebrate November 8 as the Journalists' Day. I wish all Chinese and foreign journalists working and living in China a happy day!
借此机会，也对大家长期以来对中国和中国外交的关注和报道、对外交部例行记者会的参与和支持表示衷心感谢。
I would like to take this opportunity to thank you all for your coverage of China and our diplomacy, as well as your long-time support for and participation in our regular press conferences.
我们期待与大家继续保持密切沟通与合作！
We look forward to continued, close communication and cooperation with you all!
祝大家节日快乐！
Wish you a joyful day!
2019年11月7日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on November 7, 2019
一、应埃及议会议长阿里、阿曼国家委员会主席蒙泽里邀请，全国政协主席汪洋将于11月10日至16日对上述两国进行正式友好访问。
Invited by Speaker Ali Abdel-Aal of the Egyptian Parliament and Chairman Yahya bin Mahfoudh Al Manthri of State Council of Oman, Chairman Wang Yang of the CPPCC National Committee will pay official visits to Egypt and Oman from November 10 to 16.
二、应老挝人民革命党中央政治局委员、建国阵线中央委员会主席赛宋蓬邀请，中共中央政治局常委、全国政协主席汪洋将于11月16日至19日对老挝进行正式友好访问。
Invited by member of the Political Bureau of the LPRP Central Committee and President of the Lao Front for National Construction Saysomphone Phomvihane, member of the Standing Committee of the Politburo of the CPC Central Committee and Chairman of the CPPCC National Committee Wang Yang will pay an official visit to Laos from November 16 to 19.
问：一些英国议员发布报告称，他们发现了“令人担忧的证据”（alarming evidence）可以证明中国对英国大学施加了影响力。
A group of UK lawmakers issued a report that they found "alarming evidence" on Chinese influences on the campuses of UK universities.
你对此有何评论？
I was wondering if the foreign ministry could share its response?
答：我看到了有关报道。
We noted the media reports.
中方历来坚持不干涉内政原则，一直致力于在相互尊重、互不干涉内政等原则基础上同世界各国发展友好合作关系。
China doesn't interfere in other countries' internal affairs. We develop friendly and cooperative relations with other countries based on mutual respect, non-interference and other principles.
留学生交流一直是中英人文交流的重要内容，长期以来有力地促进了两国人民之间的相互沟通与相互了解。
Exchange of students has always been an important part of cooperation between China and the UK, which has contributed to communication and mutual understanding between our peoples.
我们希望有关方面能够对此客观看待，多做有利于两国人文交往和促进中英关系发展的事，而不是无中生有，搬弄是非。
We hope the relevant side can view things objectively and do more to enhance China-UK relations and people-to-people exchange instead of making fictitious remarks and sowing discord.
问：据报道，5日，也门政府和南方过渡委员会在沙特首都正式签署《利雅得协议》，就组建新政府、整合武装力量等问题达成一致。
The Yemeni government and the Southern Transitional Council signed the Riyadh Agreement on November 5 in the Saudi capital. The two sides reached consensus on forming a new government and integrating armed forces.
答：中方坚定支持维护也门主权、独立、统一和领土完整，欢迎也门政府和南方过渡委员会签署《利雅得协议》，赞赏沙特等有关各方为此发挥的积极作用。
China firmly supports efforts to uphold Yemen's sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity. We welcome the signing of the Riyadh Agreement between the Yemeni government and the Southern Transitional Council. We also appreciate the positive role played by Saudi Arabia and other parties.
我们希望也门问题有关各方继续以也门国家和人民利益为重，加快推进政治解决进程，早日恢复也门的和平、稳定和正常秩序。
We hope relevant parties will bear in mind the interests of Yemen and its people, accelerate the political settlement process and restore peace, stability and normal order as early as possible.
2019年11月6日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on November 6, 2019
问：第74届联大将在明天召开全会，将就古巴方面提交的关于终止美国对古巴封锁的决议草案进行投票。
In tomorrow's plenary session of the 74th UN General Assembly, representatives will be voting on Cuba's draft resolution to end US blockade against it.
答：联合国大会已连续27年以压倒性多数通过了“必须终止美国对古巴的经济、商业和金融封锁”决议，敦促所有国家遵守《联合国宪章》和国际法准则，撤销或废除任何形式具有“治外法权”效力、影响他国主权及其管辖范围内实体和个人的合法权益、影响贸易和航运自由的法律和措施。
The resolution of Necessity of Ending the Economic, Commercial and Financial Embargo Imposed by the United States of America against Cuba has been adopted by an overwhelming majority at the UN General Assembly for 27 consecutive years. This resolution urges all countries to observe the UN Charter and international law, repeal or invalidate those laws and measures that have extraterritorial effects, which affect the sovereignty of other States, the legitimate interests of entities or persons under their jurisdiction and the freedom of trade and navigation.
令人遗憾的是，多年来这些决议没有得到切实执行，美国对古巴的封锁至今仍未停止，近期还出现不断加强的趋势。
Regrettably, those resolutions haven't been implemented. The US embargo against Cuba continues and intensifies.
中方一贯主张尊重各国自主选择社会制度和发展道路的权利，维护以国际法为基础的国际秩序，捍卫国际公平正义，反对以军事、政治、经济或其它手段对他国实施单方面制裁。
China respects all countries' right to independently choose their social system and development path, upholds international order based on international law, safeguards international fairness and justice, and opposes unilateral sanctions through military, political, economic and other means.
中方支持古巴方面提出的联大决议草案，将同绝大多数会员国采取一致立场。
China supports this draft resolution proposed by Cuba and will take the same stance as most UNGA members do.
中方敦促美方尽早全面取消对古巴的封锁政策，这也是国际社会的普遍呼声。
China urges the US to remove its embargo on Cuba as soon as possible, which is also what the world is calling for.
我们希望美方按照《联合国宪章》宗旨和原则以及国际关系基本准则，与古方发展正常的国家间关系，这符合美古两国和两国人民共同利益，也利于整个美洲地区的和平稳定。
We hope the US and Cuba will develop normal state-to-state relations following the purposes and principles of the UN Charter and the basic norms governing international relations. This will serve the interests of both American and Cuban people and contribute to peace and stability in the Americas.
问：加拿大总理称，中国政府已经允许恢复从加拿大进口猪肉和牛肉。
The Canadian Prime Minister says that the Chinese government has now resumed imports of Canadian beef and pork.
你能否确认这一消息？
Can you confirm that is the case?
答：今年6月，因发现加拿大输华肉产品卫生证书签发系统存在明显漏洞，无法确保加拿大输华肉产品安全，中方要求加方自6月25日起自主暂停签发输华肉产品卫生证书，并对事件开展全面调查和整改。
In June this year, we found that there were obvious safety loopholes in Canada's certificate issuance system of meat exports, and the safety of Canadian meat exported to China cannot be guaranteed. In light of that, we ask the Canadian side to suspend the issuance of veterinary health certificates for meat exported to China since June 25, to investigate into related cases and to take corrective measures.
事件发生以来，中国海关与加政府主管部门保持密切沟通，认真研究解决问题的办法。
The Chinese customs and the Canadian competent authority have been in close communication on this matter and working for a solution.
近期，加方提出关于证书签发和传递的整改“行动计划”。
Recently Canada proposed an action plan as a corrective measure for certificate issuance and delivery.
中方评估之后认为，加方整改“行动计划”基本符合保证安全的要求，同意恢复接受加政府主管部门签发的输华肉产品卫生证书。
After reviewing it, we believe this plan will meet our safety requirements and agree to accept veterinary health certificates for meat products exported to China issued by the Canadian authority.
我们希望加方切实履行食品安全监管责任，确保输华肉产品安全，保障贸易顺利进行。
We hope Canada will earnestly fulfill its regulatory responsibility, ensure the safety of its meat products exported to China, and guarantee smooth trade.
问：习近平主席同法国总统马克龙今天在北京举行了会谈。两国领导人共同见证签署了关于结束中欧地理标志协定谈判的联合声明。
President Xi and French President Macron had talks today in Beijing and witnessed the signing of a joint statement on concluding negotiations on an agreement of geographical indications between China and the EU.
请问发言人能否介绍一下什么是“地理标志”？完成中欧地理标志协定谈判具有什么意义？
Can you tell us more about the "geographical indications" and the significance of concluding the negotiations?
答：今天上午，习近平主席同来华进行国事访问的马克龙总统举行了会谈。
This morning President Xi had talks with President Macron who's currently on a state visit to China.
会谈后，两国领导人见证了一系列成果文件的签署，其中就包括结束中欧地理标志协定谈判的联合声明。
After the talks, the two leaders witnessed the signing of outcome documents, including the joint statement on concluding negotiations on an agreement of geographical indications between China and EU.
你提到的“地理标志”是一个专业性、技术性很强的问题，建议你向主管部门询问，他们应该可以给你一个比较全面的答案。
Since the "geographical indications" you asked about is a highly technical matter, I'll leave that to the competent authority if you are looking for a thorough answer.
我这里可以简单地告诉你，“地理标志”是产品产地来源的重要标志，属于知识产权的一种。
Here I'll just briefly tell you that a "geographical indication" (GI), considered as an intellectual property right, is an important sign used on products that have a specific geographical origin.
中欧双方均历史悠久，地理标志产品丰富。
China and the EU both have a long history and a rich variety of GI products.
2018年12月，中方发布了第三份中国对欧盟政策文件，其中就有“进一步加强中欧知识产权领域交流合作，支持尽早达成中欧地理标志协定”的表述。
In China's third policy paper on the EU published in December last year, it was stated that China will further enhance communication and cooperation on intellectual property rights with the EU and support early conclusion of the Agreement on Geographical Indications.
中欧地理标志协定是中国对外商签的第一个全面的、高水平的地理标志双边协定，显示了中方对中欧双边经贸关系的高度重视。
The China-EU agreement on geographical indications is the first comprehensive and high-standard bilateral agreement negotiated between China and foreign countries. It indicates the high importance China attached to its trade relations with the EU.
协定的商签也充分显示了中国政府继续深化改革、扩大开放和保护知识产权的坚定决心。
The agreement also reflects the Chinese government's determination of deepening reform, opening up and protecting IPR.
中欧地理标志协定谈判的结束有助于深化双方的互利合作，进一步巩固中欧全面战略伙伴关系的经贸基础，并进一步增强中欧双边政治互信。
Conclusion of the negotiations on this agreement will further deepen mutually beneficial cooperation, consolidate China-EU comprehensive strategic partnership, and strengthen mutual political trust between us.
中方愿与欧方继续携手维护基于规则的多边贸易体系，共同构建开放型世界经济。
China hopes to work with the EU to jointly uphold the rules-based system of free trade and an open economy.
在相互尊重、公平正义、合作共赢的基础上，推动中欧全面战略伙伴关系百尺竿头更进一步，促进双方经济社会的发展和民众福祉的提升。
In the spirit of mutual respect, fairness, justice and win-win cooperation, we will make greater strides in China-EU comprehensive strategic partnership, social development, economic growth and people's welfare.
问：关于中方恢复进口加拿大猪肉和牛肉的问题，中方究竟是何时作出这一决定的？
Just a quick follow-up question on the Canadian beef and pork imports. Do you have information about when exactly the decision was made?
答：我刚才的答复是从有关部门那里了解到的。你要问具体细节，恐怕就得再去向他们询问了。
The information in my earlier response was provided by the competent authority, so I'd refer you to them for more details.
问：昨天，美国国务卿蓬佩奥就中国政府对待维吾尔族人的政策进行了更加严厉的指责，表示中方正在威胁新疆“拘留营”幸存者的家属。中方对此有何评论？
US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo yesterday made yet more critical comments about China's treatment of the Uighur people, saying that China was threatening family members of those who had been at the "internment camps". How do you respond to this criticism?
答：首先我想强调的是，中国新疆不存在蓬佩奥先生所谓的“拘留营”。
I'd like to stress that there are no so-called "internment camps" in Xinjiang.
美方打着宗教人权的幌子，一而再、再而三地污蔑抹黑中国的治疆政策，发表毫无根据、悖离事实的错误言论，中方对此表示强烈不满和坚决反对。
Under the pretext of human rights, the US has once and again smeared China's Xinjiang policy and made fact-distorting comments. China deplores and firmly opposes that.
我们多次说过，新疆事务纯属中国内政。
As we said repeatedly, Xinjiang affairs are China's domestic affairs.
涉疆问题不是民族、宗教、人权问题，而是反暴恐和反分裂问题。
Xinjiang-related issues are not about ethnicity, religion or human rights. They are issues against violence, terrorism and separatism.
中国没有靠发动战争去应对恐怖主义，而是依法依规通过教育和培训，帮助受极端和恐怖思想影响的人们重返社会和正常生活。
China didn't start a war to combat terrorism. Instead, we provide education and training opportunities for those affected by extremist and terrorist ideologies to return to society and normal life.
曾经深受恐怖主义危害的新疆已经近3年没有发生暴恐事件，这是尊重人权的最好体现。
As a region once plagued by terrorism, Xinjiang hasn't suffered from a single violent terrorist case in almost three years. This is the best way to respect human rights.
上千名外国使节、国际组织官员、媒体人士先后访问新疆，他们亲眼看到了新疆预防性反恐和去极端化措施所取得的显著成效。
Thousands of foreign diplomats, international organization officials and media personnel visited Xinjiang and saw with their own eyes the remarkable achievements there on preventive counter-terrorism and de-radicalization.
我们希望美方个别政客摘下有色眼镜，摒弃双重标准，停止利用涉疆问题抹黑攻击中国的言行，多做有利于中美互信与合作的事。
We hope certain US politicians will reject bias and double standards, stop using Xinjiang-related issues to attack China and do things that are conducive to mutual trust and cooperation between China and the US.
问：还是关于进口加拿大肉类产品的问题，这是否意味着包括油菜籽在内的其他加拿大农产品也会很快被允许重新出口中国？这是否表明中加关系有所改善了？
On the issue of resuming meat import from Canada, is this a sign that other agricultural products like canola may be allowed in soon? And is it a sign that the relationship between China and Canada is improving?
答：关于加拿大输华油菜籽的情况，我们此前在记者会上作出过回复。
We responded to questions on Canadian canola exports to China at previous press conferences.
中国有关部门在对加拿大油菜籽例行的检疫检测中发现了问题，所以对有关商品的进口采取了措施。
The Chinese competent authority found problems in the regular quarantine and inspection process, and we took measures on those imports in light of that.
至于肉类产品，刚才我已经介绍了最新的情况。
I also talked about meat products earlier.
以前加方的证书签发系统存在漏洞，现在进行了整改，达到中方的要求，于是中方同意恢复。
There were loopholes in Canada's certificate issuance system. After addressing those loopholes, we agree to resume imports of Canadian meat products as they now meet our standards.
我这里要强调的是，在肉类产品输华问题上，加方能够做到有错就改，中方对此予以肯定。
With regard to the resumption of import of Canadian meat products, it's good for Canada to make corrections whenever there is a mistake.
至于中加关系，我还是要说，当前中加关系遭遇的困难，责任不在中方。
As for China-Canada relations, the current difficulties were not caused by the Chinese side.
我们敦促加拿大新一届政府认真对待中方严正立场和关切，立即释放孟晚舟女士，让她平安回到中国，以实际行动来推动中加关系早日重回正轨。
We urge the new Canadian government to face up to China's solemn position and concerns, release Ms. Meng Wanzhou at once, ensure her safe return to China and take concrete actions to move our relations back onto the right track.
问：据报道，伊朗总统鲁哈尼5日宣布，作为第四阶段减少履行伊核全面协议的措施，伊将于6日向福尔多核设施内1044台离心机注入六氟化铀气体。
Iranian President Rouhani announced on November 5 that beginning from November 6, Iran will start injecting uranium hexafluoride gas into 1,044 centrifuges at Fordow as part of Iran's fourth step to reduce its nuclear commitments to the JCPOA.
请问中方对此有何评论？
Do you have any comment on that?
答：我们注意到鲁哈尼总统的上述表态，也注意到伊方强调有关措施都是可逆的，并将接受国际原子能机构监督。
I noted President Rouhani's statement. Iran also stressed all its measures are reversible and monitored by the IAEA.
中方始终认为，美方应放弃对伊单边制裁和极限施压的错误做法，这是化解当前伊核危机的根本途径。
China believes that to eliminate the root cause of current Iranian nuclear crisis, the US needs to give up unilateral sanctions and maximum pressure against Iran.
与此同时，包括伊朗在内的协议各方应保持克制，完整、有效执行全面协议，不采取可能导致局势复杂化的举措。
In the meantime, parties to the JCPOA should exercise restraint, implement the deal effectively and in full, and refrain from complicating the matter.
我们也希望有关方面相向而行，加大外交努力，寻求长期解决方案，推动伊核局势走向缓和。
We hope relevant parties can move in the same direction, make greater diplomatic efforts, seek a long-term solution and work for de-escalation.
中方将继续与各方一道为此作出不懈努力。
China will continue to make efforts towards this end.
问：上周，中国和阿富汗在北京举行了地区安全合作机制有关会议。
A meeting of regional security cooperation mechanism between China and Afghanistan was held in Beijing last week.
你能否介绍有关详情？
Can you share some detail of this meeting?
答：11月1日，外交部涉外安全事务专员程国平同阿富汗国家安全委员会第一副顾问诺希尔共同主持中阿跨部门跨地区安全合作机制第三次会议。
On November 1, External Security Commissioner of the Chinese Foreign Ministry Cheng Guoping and First Deputy Adviser on National Security Council of Afghanistan Atiqullah Noshir co-chaired the third meeting of the China-Afghanistan Inter-departmental and Regional Security Cooperation Mechanism.
双方就国际地区反恐安全形势、中阿反恐安全合作等问题深入交换了意见。
Both sides exchanged views on counter-terrorism and security situation in the region and beyond, as well as China-Afghanistan cooperation in this field.
恐怖主义是人类公敌。
Terrorism is a menace to the entire human society.
面对当前日益复杂严峻的恐怖主义威胁和挑战，中方愿同包括阿富汗、巴基斯坦在内的有关国家进一步加强反恐安全合作，共同维护国际和地区的安全与稳定。
Faced with increasingly severe threats and challenges of terrorism, China is ready to step up cooperation with Afghanistan, Pakistan and other relevant countries to jointly uphold security and stability of the region and beyond.
2019年11月5日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on November 5, 2019
问：据报道，美国财政部宣布对伊朗武装部队总参谋部及与伊朗最高领袖哈梅内伊有关的9名个人实施制裁，其中还包括哈的一个儿子。
The United States on Monday imposed sanctions on nine people close to General Staff of Iran's Armed Forces and the supreme leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, including one of his sons.
答：中方一贯反对单边制裁和所谓的“长臂管辖”，认为动辄使用制裁或以制裁相威胁根本解决不了问题，对话、谈判才是解决问题的真正出路。
A:China opposes unilateral sanctions and so-called "long-arm jurisdiction". Arbitrary sanctions or threat of sanction cannot solve problems. The key is dialogue and negotiation.
希望有关方面本着平等和相互尊重的原则，通过对话、协商化解分歧，共同维护地区及世界的和平稳定。
Following the principle of equality and mutual respect, we hope relevant parties will resolve disputes through dialogue and consultation and jointly uphold peace and stability of the region and beyond.
问：有一些同昨天相似的问题。
Similar questions to the one I asked yesterday on China-US trade talks.
中美经贸磋商现在有什么新进展吗？
Do you have any updates yet, as to when and where the two leaders might meet?
中美两国领导人会在何时、何地会晤？关于中美签署经贸磋商第一阶段协议，是否也有新进展？中方在磋商中有何诉求？
Do you have any update on the current state of negotiations towards the phase one trade deal? What requirements or requests China is making to the United States at the moment in these discussions?
答：你的这些问题都应该去向商务部询问。
I'll leave that to the Ministry of Commerce.
我能告诉你的是，中美保持着接触，目前双方经贸磋商取得了进展，并正按照计划向前推进。
What I can tell you is that China and the US stay in contact. The trade talks have achieved progress and are now moving forward as planned.
至于你关心的两国元首会晤问题，我还是那句话，两国元首通过各种方式保持着联系。
I have nothing to update you regarding the meeting between two presidents. As I said, they stay in contact through various means.
问：据报道，4日，美国总统国家安全事务助理奥布莱恩在美国-东盟峰会上称，中方利用恐吓手段试图阻止东盟国家开采近海资源。
On November 4, White House National Security Adviser Robert O'Brien at the US-ASEAN Summit took a swipe at China, saying Beijing was using intimidation to try to stop ASEAN nations from exploiting their offshore resources.
这不是21世纪的行事之道，而是征服。
"That's just not how things should be done in the 21st Century. That's conquest.
大国不应欺凌其他国家。
Big countries should not bully other countries.
美国不是搅局者，美国总是受邀而来。
We don't think we're meddlers. We always come when we're invited."
请问中方对此有何评论？
I wonder if you have any comment on his remarks?
答：美方官员的所言所谈，听起来言之凿凿、咄咄逼人，但其实是颠倒黑白、倒打一耙。
The words of the US official sounded assertive but were in fact aimed to shift blames.
美方的这番话更像是在说美国自己的所作所为。
His remarks were more of a confession of the country's own behaviors in the South China Sea.
我这里要说的是，在中国和东盟国家的共同努力下，当前南海局势总体保持稳定。
With the joint efforts made by China and ASEAN countries, the situation in the South China Sea remains generally stable.
中国和东盟国家一直就南海问题保持良好沟通合作。中国和东盟国家有意愿、有能力、有信心共同维护南海和平稳定，共同推动南海形势不断向好发展。
We have good communication and cooperation on this issue, and we have every readiness, capability and confidence to safeguard peace and stability while working for improvement in the situation in the South China Sea.
我们奉劝美方，尊重和支持地区国家的努力，不要做国家关系的挑拨者，地区稳定的破坏者，东亚合作的搅局者。
We advise the US to respect and support regional countries' efforts, and not to stir up troubles, destabilize the region or undermine East Asian cooperation.
问：俄罗斯总理称，俄方欢迎在京举行的新一轮阿富汗人内部会议，包括阿富汗政府、阿富汗领导人和塔利班代表都将与会。
Russian prime minister announced that it welcomed China's imitative to hold the next round of intra-Afghan talks in Beijing with participation of all sides, including the Afghan government, other Afghan leaders and Taliban.
你能否介绍此次会议具体细节？
Can you give us any details of the next meeting?
答：中方坚定支持“阿人主导、阿人所有”的广泛包容性和平和解进程，支持包括阿富汗政府、阿富汗塔利班在内的阿国内各派开展对话，愿在尊重阿各方意愿基础上，为推进阿和平和解进程，包括阿富汗人内部对话和谈判提供便利和帮助。
China firmly supports the "Afghan-led, Afghan-owned", broad and inclusive process of peace and reconciliation. We support the intra-Afghan dialogue between the Afghan government, the Afghan Taliban and other parties. We are ready to provide convenience and assistance for Afghanistan's peace and reconciliation process based on our respect for the will of all relevant Afghan parties.
如有相关消息，中方将及时发布，请你保持关注。
The information you asked about, once available, will be released in due course.
问：据法国总统府官员表示，本周三法国总统马克龙访华期间，双方将会签署一份协定，其中有涉及气候变化《巴黎协定》不可逆转这样的表述，你能否证实？这份协议的签署处于美国正式启动退出《巴黎协定》程序之际，中方对此有何评论？
According to the French president's office, on Wednesday during President Macron's visit to China, the two sides will sign an agreement, which includes a paragraph on the irreversibility of the Paris Agreement. Can you confirm that? And what's your comment regarding the signing of this text when the US started its process of withdrawing from the Paris Agreement?
答：我觉得你好像更想知道我们对美方退出《巴黎协定》的看法。
I guess you are more interested in our view on US withdrawal from the Paris Agreement.
中方对美方正式启动退出《巴黎协定》有关程序表示遗憾。
China regrets that the US began the process to withdraw from the Paris Agreement.
气候变化是全人类面临的共同挑战，国际社会所有成员应当携手合作，各尽所能，共同加以应对。
Climate change is a challenge to all human beings. All countries need to work together with their best efforts.
在今年9月举行的联合国气候行动峰会上，各方强调坚持多边主义的重要性和合作应对气候变化的必要性，支持《巴黎协定》的全面落实。
The United Nations Climate Action Summit last September stressed the importance of multilateralism, necessity of cooperation and support for fully implementing the Paris Agreement.
不久前俄罗斯正式加入《巴黎协定》，协定缔约方达到187个。
Now there are 187 parties to the Paris Agreement after Russia joined it not long ago.
我们希望美方能够多一点责任和担当，多为多边合作进程贡献推动力，而不是增添负能量。
On multilateral cooperation, we hope the US will act proactively and responsibly instead of pulling out.
中国是最大的发展中国家，始终坚定支持多边主义。
As the biggest developing country, China firmly supports multilateralism.
我们支持《巴黎协定》，积极承担符合自身发展阶段和国情的国际责任，也切实采取应对气候变化的政策行动。
We support the Paris Agreement, actively fulfill our international obligations that are consistent with our development stage and national condition, and take policy actions on climate change.
未来，中国将继续做好应对气候变化的各项工作，积极参与气候变化的多边进程，坚定不移地维护全球气候治理进程。
We will continue to work towards this end, participate in multilateral process and uphold global governance in this area.
我们也会同国际社会各方保持密切沟通协调。
We will also keep close communication and coordination with other countries.
你刚才提到了马克龙总统正在中国访问，据我了解，访华期间双方领导人将就气候变化问题深入交换意见。
You asked about President Macron's visit to China. As I know, he and Chinese leaders will exchange views on climate change.
至于你提到的具体协议，请保持关注，有这方面的消息我们会及时发布。
We will keep you updated on any specific agreement between the two sides.
最后我要重申，中方愿意同国际社会各方一道，积极推动《巴黎协定》全面有效落实，促进全球的绿色、低碳和可持续发展。
I'd like to reaffirm China's commitment to working with all countries for full and effective implementation of the Paris Agreement and for green, low-carbon and sustainable development of the world.
问：昨天美国总统特朗普表示，中国和俄罗斯都希望同美国在军控领域达成协议。
US President Trump said that China and Russia both would like to reach an arms control deal with the US.
美国正与中国和俄罗斯磋商，我认为他们希望达成这个协议，特别是在核武器方面。
He added that the US is dealing with China and Russia, "I think they would both like to do it especially as we are talking about nuclear weapons."
请问中方对此有何回应？
What's your comment?
答：对于美方所提的中美俄三边的军控谈判，我们已经多次表明过立场。
Regarding the trilateral arms control negotiation that involves China and Russia as the US claims, we stated our position on many previous occasions.
中方的态度十分明确，搞三边军控谈判的前提和基础根本就不存在，中方不会参加。
China's attitude is very clear. The premise and basis for a trilateral arms control negotiation doesn't exist at all and China won't be part of that.
我们此前也说过，美方总是想拉上中国，究竟是想通过这样的谈判，把自己的核力量减到中国的水平，还是想把中国的核力量提升到美国的水平？
Like we said, the US has been trying to drag China in when it comes to this issue. We wonder whether the US wants to have China's nuclear arsenal increased to its level or reduce its own nuclear arms to China's level?
作为世界上拥有最大和最先进核武库的国家，美国应当切实履行其核裁军的特殊责任，回应俄罗斯有关延长《新削减进攻性战略武器条约》的呼吁，并进一步削减其庞大的核武库，为其他核武器国家加入多边核裁军谈判创造条件。
As the possessor of the largest and most advanced nuclear arsenal in the world, the US should earnestly fulfill its special responsibility for nuclear disarmament, respond to Russia's call to extend the new Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (New START), further reduce its large nuclear arsenal and create conditions for other nuclear states to join multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations.
问：日前，英国BBC报道称，中国在俄远东地区大量租赁土地，引发当地居民不满，被视为对俄“扩张”。
According to BBC reports, China rent a large amount of land in Russia's Far East Region, which is complained by locals as an "expansion".
你对此有何评论？
I wonder if you have any comment?
答：所谓中国在俄远东地区大量租赁土地进行“扩张”的报道早已被证明是不实之辞。
So-called "China expansion" in Russia's Far East Region has long been proven fake news.
个别媒体罔顾真相，老调重弹，通过炒冷饭来质疑和抹黑中俄远东合作。这种做法很不负责任。
It is irresponsible for certain media to use old and baseless materials to question and smear China-Russia cooperation.
今年是中俄建交70周年，两国务实合作，特别是远东合作取得的成就有目共睹。
This year marks the 70th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic ties between China and Russia. Our practical cooperation has yielded remarkable outcomes especially in the Far East Region.
中国连续多年保持俄远东第一大贸易伙伴地位，积极参与远东跨越式发展区和自由港项目，是俄罗斯远东第一大外资来源国。
China has been the biggest trading partner of the Far East Region for many consecutive years. We are also its biggest source of FDI as we participate in the region's leap-foward development zone and free port projects.
农业合作是中俄远东合作的重要内容，双方签署有《关于深化中俄大豆合作的发展规划》、《中国东北地区和俄罗斯远东及贝加尔地区农业发展规划》，积极商讨加强在农产品贸易、加工、仓储、物流等领域合作。
Agriculture is another key area for cooperation there. China and Russia signed a development plan on cooperation in soybeans and the Development Plan for Agriculture in Northeast China and the Russian Far East and Baikal Regions, covering trade in agricultural products, processing, warehousing and logistics.
可以说，中俄远东农业合作为促进双方社会经济发展、提高民众福祉发挥了重要作用。
Agricultural cooperation plays an important role in our economic growth, social development and people's welfare.
我们愿同俄方继续携手努力，本着互利共赢原则，不断深化相关领域务实合作，让双方民众感受到更多实实在在的利益。
Pursuing the principle of mutual benefit, China will continue to work with Russia for deeper practical cooperation and more tangible benefits.
问：就在法国总统马克龙访华之际，法国《世界报》刊发报道称，一家中国的银行涉嫌在法国洗钱。
Le Monde published an article regarding suspected money laundering of a Chinese bank in France while French President Macron is still visiting China.
答：我们注意到有关报道。
We noted the report.
中国政府一贯要求中国企业依法合规经营。
The Chinese government asks Chinese companies to operate according to law and regulation.
中法两国之间有司法互助协议，两国司法机关就有关案件保持着良好的沟通与合作。
China and France have an agreement on judicial mutual assistance, and our judicial organs maintain good communication and cooperation in this case.
希望个别媒体不要对两国间正常的司法协作进行恶意炒作。他们在马克龙总统访华期间这样做居心不良。
As President Macron is still visiting China, I hope certain media will stop dramatizing a normal case of judicial assistance out of ulterior intentions.
当前，中法关系保持高水平健康稳定发展。
China and France now enjoy a sound and stable relationship performing at a high level.
中方愿以马克龙总统此次访华为契机，将两国各领域交流合作推向更高水平。
Taking President Macron's visit as an opportunity, China is ready to elevate our exchange and cooperation to a higher level.
问：据报道，4日，伊朗原子能机构主席萨利希称，伊朗启动30台IR-6型离心机，目前在运行的IR-6型离心机达到60台。
Ali Akbar Salehi, head of the Atomic Energy Organization of Iran, said on November 4 that Iran launched the cascade of 30 IR-6 centrifuges, and the country is now operating 60 IR-6 advanced centrifuges.
同时，伊正研发IR-9型离心机。
In the meantime, Iranian scientists are working on a prototype called the IR-9.
同一天，欧盟、德国官员呼吁伊朗方面保持克制，敦促伊方遵守伊核协议。
On the same day, EU and German officials called on Iran to exercise restraint and observe the JCPOA.
答：我看到了有关报道。
I noted relevant reports.
正如我们此前多次指出的，美国单方面退出伊核问题全面协议、对伊奉行极限施压政策，是导致伊核局势持续紧张的根源。
As we repeatedly pointed out, the root cause of sustained tensions around the Iranian nuclear issue lies with the US unilateral withdrawal from the JCPOA and its maximum pressure campaign against Iran.
解铃还须系铃人。
As the Chinese saying goes, "to undo a knot, no one is more suited than the person who tied it."
要缓解当前危机，美方应放弃对伊单边制裁和极限施压的错误做法。
To relieve the current crisis, the US needs to abandon the wrong strategies such as unilateral sanctions and maximum pressure.
同时，包括伊朗在内的协议各方要保持克制，致力于完整、有效执行全面协议，坚持在全面协议框架内解决分歧。
In the meantime, Iran and all other parties to the JCPOA need to exercise restraint, implement the deal effectively and in full, and stick to the JCPOA framework to resolve disputes.
我们敦促有关方面相向而行，加大外交努力，推动伊核局势走向缓和。
We urge the relevant sides to move toward the same direction, make greater diplomatic efforts and work for de-escalation.
中方将继续与各方一道为此作出努力。
China will continue to work with other parties towards this end.
问：关于中美经贸的问题。
I have questions related to China-US trade.
有报道称，作为经贸磋商第一阶段协议的一部分，中美官员正积极探讨撤销此前相互加征的部分关税。
Media reports say the US and Chinese officials are actively considering rolling back some tariffs as part of the phase one trade deal that's under discussions.
如果美方撤销部分关税，中方是否也会这样做？
Would China roll back some tariffs if the US did?
答：我刚才在回答记者提问时已经说过了，关于中美经贸磋商的具体情况，建议你向商务部去询问。
I'd still refer you to the Ministry of Commerce regarding the China-US trade talks.
我能给你的原则回应是，加征关税不是解决经贸问题的正确途径，贸易冲突升级也不符合任何一方的利益。
Here's my principled response. Slapping additional tariffs is not the right way to deal with trade issues, and escalated trade frictions will serve no one's interest.
当前中美经贸磋商已经取得进展，而且正在向前推进。
Currently our talks have achieved progress and are moving forward.
希望双方能够相向而行，在相互尊重、平等互利的基础上找到妥善解决问题的办法。
We hope the two sides will move toward the same direction and work out a solution based on mutual respect, equality and mutual benefit.
问：据报道，印度方面因担心大量中国商品涌入印度市场会加剧双方贸易不平衡，所以不参加RCEP协定。中方对此有何评论？
I was wondering if MFA could comment on India's decision to not join the RCEP due to concerns about cheap products from China potentially harming domestic industries?
答：RCEP是一项区域自贸安排，本质上是互利共赢的。
The RCEP is a regional FTA featuring mutual benefits in nature.
如果RCEP签署并且付诸实施，当然有利于中国商品进入印度市场以及其他参与方的市场。
Once signed and put in place, the RCEP will help Chinese goods go to the Indian and other participating countries' markets.
同样道理，也有利于印度商品进入中国市场和其他参与方的市场。
In the same vein, it will also help Indian goods to enter China's and other participating countries' markets.
这是双向的，也是互补的。
This is a two-way and complementary arrangement.
我想指出，中印同为新兴大国和发展中大国，拥有27亿人口的巨大市场，两国贸易有很大的潜力可挖。
As emerging markets and major developing countries, if put together, China and India boast a huge market of 2.7 billion people with tremendous potential in trade.
中方无意追求对印度的贸易顺差，过去5年，中国从印度的进口额增长了15%。
China doesn't pursue trade surplus against India. Over the past five years, China's imports from India increased by 15%.
双方可以进一步拓宽思路，采取综合性的措施，加强投资、产能、旅游等领域的合作，将合作蛋糕不断做大。在两国合作发展过程中实现两国经贸关系的平衡、可持续发展。
The two sides should explore more ways and comprehensive measures to step up cooperation in investment, production capacity and tourism, making the pie even bigger and fostering balanced and sustainable trade relations.
最后我要重申，RCEP是开放的。
I want to stress that the RCEP is an open initiative.
中方愿本着互谅互让的精神，与各方一道继续协商解决与印度谈判中面临的问题。
China will continue to work with all parties to resolve the outstanding issues for India through negotiations in the spirit of mutual understanding and accommodation.
我们欢迎印度尽早加入到协定中来。
We welcome the joining of India at an early date.
问：有报道称，中方领导人对赴美签署经贸磋商第一阶段协议持开放态度，你对此有何评论？
There were reports that the Chinese leader is open to going to the US for signing a phase one trade deal. What does Beijing think of that?
对于签署协议的地点，中方是否有倾向性选择？是否将邀请特朗普总统来华签署协议？
Does China have any preferences on the signing location? Has Beijing also proposed that President Trump come to China?
答：这两天记者已经问了好几遍了，我的答案是一样的。
This question was raised several times these two days. My answer remains the same.
我可以重申一下，关于大家关心的中美两国元首会晤，我想指出，习近平主席同特朗普总统一直通过各种方式保持着联系。
Regarding the meeting between the two presidents, I'd like to say that President Xi and President Trump stay in contact through various means.
问：明天，香港特区行政长官林郑月娥将赴北京，你是否能介绍更多细节？她会同谁会见？她此行有何目的？
Hong Kong Chief Executive Carrie Lam is expected to come to Beijing tomorrow. Do you have more details on whom she's going to meet and the aim of her visit?
答：这不是一个外交方面的问题。
This is not a diplomatic matter.
如果你关注香港特区政府发布的消息，应该能了解林郑月娥行政长官此次来内地的行程。
If you follow the information released by the Hong Kong SAR government, you would have an idea about the agenda of Chief Executive Carrie Lam's visit.
有关安排特区政府都已对外作了介绍，建议你关注一下。
The Hong Kong SAR government already released the relevant information. You might be interested in that.
问：你刚刚提到中印两国拥有27亿人口的市场。
You said it's 2.7 billion people that China and India put together.
那么印度这次决定不签署RCEP协定，是否会显得另外15个国家签署的重要性降低了？
Considering India's not taking part in the RCEP agreement, do you think this decision will dent the importance of the deal that has been signed by the 15 countries?
答：昨天，第三次RCEP领导人会议在泰国曼谷举行，会议发表了联合声明。
The third RCEP summit was held in Bangkok yesterday, after which a joint statement was released.
声明表示，15个成员国已经结束了全部20个章节的文本谈判，以及实质上所有市场准入问题的谈判，将启动法律文本审核工作，以便在2020年签署这一协定。
It noted that the 15 participating countries have concluded text-based negotiations for all 20 chapters and essentially all their market access issues, and tasked legal scrubbing by them to commence for signing in 2020.
国际社会高度关注这一重要进展，普遍认为在当前形势下完成RCEP谈判，对外发出了构建开放型世界经济，支持自由贸易的积极信息，也有利于推进本地区贸易投资自由化与便利化，增强地区发展潜力，造福地区各国人民。
The international community pays extensive attention to this important progress. It is generally believed that the conclusion of RCEP negotiations sent out a positive message for building an open world economy and supporting free trade. It will also advance trade and investment liberalization and facilitation in this region, boost greater potential and deliver more benefits to local people.
刚才我已经说过，中方愿与其他各方一道本着互谅互让的精神，继续协商解决与印度谈判中面临的问题。
Like I said, China stands ready to join all parties to resolve the outstanding issues for India through further negotiations in the spirit of mutual understanding and accommodation.
问：和进博会有关的问题。
A question related to the CIIE.
昨天，欧洲商会发布一项调查称，进博会太注重“追求快而大的结果”，而不是为欧洲企业来华经营创造良好环境。
The European Chamber of Commerce released a survey with its members yesterday, which said that the CIIE put too much emphasis on "quick, headline results instead of creating an environment for European companies to expand in China in the long term".
中方对此有何评论？
I was wondering what's your response to this?
答：我还没有看到你提到的这份调查，我看到的是：
I haven't read this survey report you mentioned. Here I'd like to tell you what I noted.
第一，今天马克龙总统在进博会开幕式上的讲话。
First, I noticed President Macron's remarks at the CIIE opening ceremony today.
他对中方举办进博会给予高度评价和赞赏，表示欧方希望抓住机遇，同中方深化在各个领域特别是经贸领域的合作。
He warmly applauded China for holding this event and said the European side hopes to use this opportunity to deepen cooperation across the board, especially in trade.
第二，不久前欧盟驻华代表团发表的声明。
Second, I noticed the statement released by the EU Commission in Beijing several days ago.
声明表示，欧方高度赞赏中方通过举办进博会为欧方企业提供新的商机，这体现了中方的诚意。
The EU highly commended the business opportunities for European companies provided by China through the CIIE, which demonstrated China's sincerity.
从上述这两条信息来看，我理解欧方对中方举办进博会是持积极和赞赏态度的。
Judging from those messages, I can see the EU side appreciates the CIIE.
欧洲国家和欧洲企业参与此次进博会的踊跃程度和热情之高很能说明问题。
It is even more evident if you look at the active participation and high enthusiasm of the European countries and businesses in the CIIE.
2019年11月4日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on November 4, 2019
问：据报道，当地时间11月3日上午，第22次中国-东盟10+1领导人会议在泰国曼谷举行，会议发表了涉及“一带一路”的声明。
On the morning of November 3 local time, a statement regarding the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) was released after the 22nd China-ASEAN Summit in Bangkok, Thailand.
你能否介绍有关情况？
I was wondering if you could give us more details on that?
答：当地时间3日下午，李克强总理在泰国曼谷出席第22次中国-东盟领导人会议，也就是10+1会议。
On the afternoon of November 3 local time, Premier Li Keqiang attended the 22nd China-ASEAN (10+1) Summit in Bangkok, Thailand.
李克强总理在发言中表示，中方坚定不移走和平发展道路，奉行互利共赢的开放战略，愿将共建“一带一路”倡议同东盟整体及各国发展对接。
In his speech, Premier Li stated China's commitment to peaceful development and a mutually beneficial strategy for openness, and our readiness to form synergies between the BRI and the development of ASEAN as a whole and its members respectively.
与会东盟国家领导人表示愿积极参与共建“一带一路”，同中方拓展互联互通等领域合作，共同维护多边主义和自由贸易。
The ASEAN leaders expressed their willingness to participate in the BRI, to expand their cooperation with China in connectivity and other areas, and to jointly uphold multilateralism and free trade.
会议发表了关于“一带一路”倡议同《东盟互联互通总体规划2025》对接合作的联合声明等3份成果文件。
Three outcomes documents were released, including the Joint Statement on the Master Plan on ASEAN Connectivity 2025 and the Belt and Road Initiative.
此次关于“一带一路”联合声明的发表，是继中国与东盟10国分别签署双边共建“一带一路”合作文件后，中国和东盟整体就高质量共建“一带一路”迈出的又一重要步伐。
Issuing this joint statement is another important step taken by China and ASEAN towards quality BRI cooperation after China signed bilateral agreements with the ASEAN countries respectively.
这有助于双方加快推进现有经济走廊和中泰铁路、中老铁路、雅万高铁等运输通道建设，为本地区实现全面互联互通增添新动力，也有助于实现中国与东盟各国发展规划有效对接，推动中国-东盟关系进一步提质升级。
It will contribute to regional connectivity by advancing transportation routes, including the existing economic corridors, China-Thailand Railway, China-Laos Railway and Jakarta-Bandung high-speed Railway. It will also align China's development plan with those of ASEAN countries and elevate China-ASEAN relations to a higher level.
中国始终把东盟作为周边外交优先方向和高质量共建“一带一路”重点地区。
China sees ASEAN as a priority in neighborhood diplomacy and a key area for high-quality BRI cooperation.
中方愿同东盟各国一道，积极弘扬丝路精神，秉持共商共建共享原则，坚持开放、绿色、廉洁理念，全面推进政策沟通、设施联通、贸易畅通、资金融通、民心相通，努力实现高标准、惠民生、可持续目标，携手打造更高水平的战略伙伴关系，建设更为紧密的中国-东盟命运共同体。
Based on the Silk Road spirit, the principle of extensive consultation, joint efforts and shared benefits, and the concepts of open, green and clean cooperation, we will work with ASEAN countries for development policy synergy, infrastructure development, unimpeded trade, financial cooperation and people-to-people bond, for high-standard, people-centered and sustainable development, for strategic partnership at a higher level, and for a closer China-ASEAN community with a shared future.
问：关于中美经贸的问题。
A question about China-US trade.
上周末，美国总统特朗普表示他可能会邀请中方领导人到艾奥瓦州签署经贸协议。
Over the weekend, President Trump suggested that he might invite the Chinese leader to Iowa to sign a trade agreement.
请问中方是否有此计划？如果没有，那么假定中美两国元首会晤时会签署经贸协议，你能否介绍双方就会晤地点进行沟通的情况？
Does China have any plans for that? If not, can you tell us about what discussions you are currently having with the United States about where the two presidents might meet if it is them who sign the trade agreement?
我也知道，此事目前还有很多不确定性。
I do understand there is still some uncertainty about what exactly will happen.
答：你的问题比我的答案长很多。
Your question is even longer than my answer.
关于中美元首会晤，我想指出的是，习近平主席同特朗普总统一直通过各种方式保持着联系。
Regarding the meeting you talked about, I'd like to note that President Xi and President Trump have stayed in contact through various means.
问：据报道，东盟峰会期间，各方就区域全面经济伙伴关系协定（RCEP）进行了谈判，决定将协定签署时间推迟至2020年。
The RCEP discussed at the ASEAN summit is expected to be delayed until 2020.
中方对这一决定有何评论？协定签署受阻的原因是什么？
I was wondering if you could comment on the delay, for instance, what's standing in the way of completing the agreement?
答：RCEP是目前亚太地区规模最大、最重要的自由贸易协定，参与谈判的成员包括东盟10国和中国、日本、韩国、澳大利亚、新西兰、印度共16个国家，协定达成后，将进一步促进本地区产业和价值链的融合，为区域经济一体化注入强劲动力。
The RCEP, being the largest and most important free trade agreement in Asia Pacific, covers 16 negotiating members including the ASEAN countries, China, Japan, the ROK, Australia, New Zealand and India. Once concluded, the RCEP will further boost regional economic integration by knitting industrial and value chains.
在各方共同努力下，RCEP谈判已经取得了重要进展。
Important progress has been made in the RCEP negotiations.
据我了解，目前各方还在保持密切接触，今天晚些时候还将举行第三次RCEP领导人会议。
All parties remain in close contact, and the third leaders' meeting will be held later today.
当然，我们理解，目前的进展同各方期待可能还存在一定差距，但总的看，各方已原则上承诺将于明年签署协定，这还是令人鼓舞的。
We understand that the progress achieved doesn't quite meet all parties' expectations, but it is still inspiring that all parties made principled commitments on signing an agreement next year.
在当前单边主义和保护主义抬头的背景下，各方上述决定对外发出了东亚国家支持多边主义、支持自由贸易的积极信号。
It's an encouraging message of East Asian countries' support for multilateralism and free trade when faced with unilateralism and protectionism.
所以在这里，我们要鼓励有关各方继续以建设性的态度参与谈判，相向而行，争取尽快取得实质性的最终成果。
Here we call on all parties concerned to continue constructive negotiations, work toward the shared goal, and achieve substantive, final results as soon as possible.
问：欧盟驻华代表团1日发表声明称，欧盟欢迎进口博览会为欧盟成员国及欧盟企业带来的新商机。
The European Union Beijing commission issued a statement on November 1 that the EU welcomes every new business opportunity that results for EU Member States and EU business from a trade fair like the CIIE.
欧盟欢迎中方关于中国坚持改革开放的承诺，但也存在承诺疲劳的风险。
It also welcomes China's continued commitment to reform but says there may be promise fatigue.
答：我们注意到欧盟驻华代表团有关声明，也注意到声明指出，去年参加首届进口博览会的欧盟企业普遍反映，参展使它们增加了销售额，找到了新的客户，我想这是一个非常令人振奋的消息。
I noted this statement. According to the statement, feedback from last year's participating EU companies shows an inspiring fact that they had increased sales or met new potential buyers.
据了解，本届进口博览会期间，欧洲国家参展热情依然不减。
European countries are still enthusiastic in participating in the CIIE this year.
17个欧洲国家将参加本届进博会国家展，法国、意大利、捷克、希腊均是今年进博会的主宾国，德国、意大利、法国、英国、瑞士参展企业展览面积位列前十位以内。
Seventeen European countries will be in the country exhibition. France, Italy, Czech and Greece are Guest of Honor Countries. Exhibition areas for companies from Germany, Italy, France, the UK and Switzerland are among the top ten of all countries.
我们相信，这些参展的国家和企业在本届进博会上一定能够乘兴而来，满意而归。
As the EU countries and companies are enthusiastic in participating in the CIIE, we're sure they will be pleased with the results afterwards.
关于中国坚持改革开放的承诺，中方一向言必信、行必果，我们会全面、有效地落实我们作出的各项承诺。
Regarding China's commitment in reform and opening up, it is China's tradition to honor commitments and we will act on all our promises effectively and in full.
兑现这些承诺既是中方对国际社会和外国企业负责任的表现，也是我们自身推动经济高质量发展、打造对外开放新局面、不断提高人民生活水平的内在需要。
Fulfilling commitments demonstrates how we are responsible for the world and foreign companies, and meets our own demand to boost high-quality economic growth, foster new prospects for opening up and improve people's lives.
进博会的再次召开展示出中国主动向世界开放市场的重大举措不是权宜之计，而是面向世界、面向未来、促进共同发展的长远考量。
By holding the CIIE again, we are sending a message that China's opening up is not a temporary fix but a long-term vision for the world, for the future and for common development.
所以请欧方放心，中方在履行诺言、兑现承诺方面会不遗余力，不存在所谓的疲劳问题。
The European side can rest assured that there will be no "fatigue" as we spare no efforts in honoring commitments.
最后我还要指出，中国和欧盟是世界两大重要经济体和两大稳定力量，在维护多边主义和开放型世界经济、反对保护主义和单边主义方面拥有广泛共识。
China and EU, as two major economies and anchors of stability, share broad consensus in safeguarding multilateralism and an open world economy while rejecting protectionism and unilateralism.
希望欧方能同中方一道，继续本着相互尊重、互利共赢的精神，保持开放包容，持续扩大合作，不断造福中欧人民，也为世界注入更多的稳定性和正能量。
With mutual respect and a win-win spirit, we hope the EU can work together with China for openness, inclusiveness, broader cooperation, benefits for Chinese and European people, and greater stability and positive energy for the world.
问：美国-东盟峰会特使在美国-东盟峰会期间批评中方在南海的有关威胁行动。
The US envoy to the US-ASEAN Summit denounced what he called "Chinese intimidation" in the South China Sea.
你对此有何评论？
What's your response to the comment?
答：我也是刚刚看到媒体的报道，还需要进一步了解核实情况。
I read the reports just now, and I need to check on that.
我现在能告诉你的是，在中国和东盟国家共同努力下，当前南海局势总体保持稳定。
What I can tell you at the moment is that the situation in the South China Sea remains generally stable thanks to the concerted efforts by China and ASEAN countries.
美方不是南海问题的当事国，应当充分尊重地区国家维护南海和平稳定的努力，而不应对南海事务指手画脚，不应在南海地区兴风作浪。
Being a country that is not concerned in the South China Sea issue, the US should give full respect to regional countries for their efforts in safeguarding peace and stability. It should not randomly comment on relevant affairs or stir up troubles in the South China Sea.
昨天，第22次中国-东盟领导人会议在泰国曼谷举行，李克强总理和与会的东盟国家领导人一致同意要共同维护好南海的和平稳定，要按照共同商定的时间表来积极推进南海行为准则的磋商。
During the 22nd China-ASEAN Summit yesterday in Bangkok, Thailand, Premier Li Keqiang and ASEAN leaders agreed to join hands in upholding peace and stability in the South China Sea and to advance COC consultations following an agreed schedule.
与会的东盟国家领导人还一致认为东盟-中国关系是东盟伙伴关系中最具活力的一组关系。我想，这是对美方挑拨离间企图的有力回应。
The ASEAN leaders also believe that China-ASEAN partnership is the most dynamic one between ASEAN and other countries, which I think is a strong response to the US attempt of sowing discord.
问：美国国务院11月1日发布“2018年国别反恐报告”称，中国在新疆以反恐和打击极端主义为名，压迫维吾尔族等穆斯林少数民族。
The US Department of State on November 1 released its Country Reports on Terrorism 2018, saying that China has oppressed the Uighurs and other Muslim ethnic minorities in Xinjiang using counter-terrorism and de-radicalization as a pretext.
中方反恐行动缺乏透明度。
It also says that China's counter-terrorism efforts lack transparency.
中方对此有何回应？
Do you have any comment?
答：新疆是中国反恐、去极端化斗争的主战场。
In China, Xinjiang is a major domain for countering terrorism and extremism.
1990年至2016年底，新疆发生了数千起暴恐活动，造成大量无辜人员伤亡和财产损失。
From 1990 to the end of 2016, Xinjiang witnessed thousands of violent and terrorist attacks, which caused great casualties and property losses.
在此形势下，新疆采取反恐和去极端化举措，不仅符合中国法律，也符合国际上提倡的共同理念。
Against such a backdrop, Xinjiang took counter-terrorism and de-radicalization measures according to Chinese law and in keeping with the common ideals cherished by the international community.
事实证明，有关举措取得良好成效，受到新疆各族人民欢迎和支持。
Facts have proven that those measures achieved good results and were applauded and supported by people of all ethnic groups in Xinjiang.
过去3年中，新疆没有发生1起暴恐案件，各族人民生命权、健康权、发展权等基本权利得到了有力保障。
In the past three years, there wasn't a single terrorist attack in Xinjiang. Local people's right to life, health and development has been effectively safeguarded.
去年底以来，50多批外国代表团、上千人参访新疆，纷纷称赞新疆反恐和去极端化工作值得学习借鉴。
Since the end of last year, over 1,000 foreigners have visited Xinjiang in more than 50 groups. They commended the counter-terrorism and de-radicalization measures taken in Xinjiang and said the experience there is worth learning.
美方不仅对上述事实闭目塞听，而且借所谓“反恐报告”诬蔑攻击新疆反恐努力。
The US chooses to turn a blind eye to those plain facts. What's worse, it uses this so-called "country report on terrorism" to slander and attack the counter-terrorism efforts in Xinjiang.
这一卑劣做法，必将为国际社会有识之士所不齿。
Those who are not blinded by prejudice, wherever they come from, will agree that such practice is beneath contempt.
中方要求美方立即摒弃在反恐问题上的“双重标准”，停止借涉疆问题干涉中国内政。
China demands that the US immediately discard its double standards in terrorism, and stop using Xinjiang as a pretext to interfere in China's internal affairs.
2019年11月1日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on November 1, 2019
为推动中欧全面战略伙伴关系持续健康稳定发展，加强各领域交流和务实互利合作，中国政府决定设立欧洲事务特别代表，并任命吴红波大使担任首任特别代表。
With a view to promoting the sustained, sound and steady development of the China-EU comprehensive strategic partnership and enhancing exchange and practical mutually-beneficial cooperation in various fields, the Chinese government has decided to set up the position of Special Representative of the Chinese Government on European Affairs and appointed Ambassador Wu Hongbo to assume this new role.
吴红波大使是资深外交官，熟悉欧洲地区事务，曾担任联合国副秘书长，外交部部长助理，中国驻德国、菲律宾大使等职。
Ambassador Wu is a veteran diplomat well-versed in European affairs. His diplomatic career includes such posts as under secretary-general of the United Nations, assistant foreign minister of China and Chinese ambassador to Germany and the Philippines.
吴大使将协助外交部协调处理涉欧事务，推动中欧高层交往，参与中欧各领域重要交流合作，为深化中欧和平、增长、改革、文明四大伙伴关系不懈努力。
In this new capacity, Ambassador Wu will work towards deepening the China-EU partnership for peace, growth, reform and civilization by assisting the foreign ministry in coordinating European affairs, promoting high-level interaction, and taking part in important exchange and cooperation events.
问：10月31日，英国政府发表了最新一份《香港问题半年报告》，中方对此有何评论？
The British government issued its latest six-monthly report on Hong Kong yesterday. I wonder if you'd like to respond to it?
答：我们对英国政府定期发表所谓《香港问题半年报告》，对香港事务说三道四的错误做法表示强烈不满和坚决反对。
We deplore and reject the British government's wrong practice of making wanton remarks on Hong Kong by issuing the so-called six-monthly reports.
香港回归以来，中国政府严格依照宪法和基本法对香港特区实行管治，“一国两制”、“港人治港”、高度自治方针得到切实贯彻落实，这是任何不带偏见的人都无法否认的客观事实。
After the return of Hong Kong, the Chinese government exercises jurisdiction over it in strict accordance with the Constitution and the Basic Law of the Hong Kong SAR. The principles of "one country, two systems" and Hong Kong people governing Hong Kong with a high degree of autonomy have been earnestly implemented. This is a fact all unbiased people will acknowledge.
中国政府全面准确贯彻“一国两制”方针的决心坚定不移，维护国家主权安全发展利益的决心坚定不移，维护香港长期繁荣稳定的决心坚定不移。
China is determined to fully and accurately implement the "one country, two systems" policy, to safeguard national sovereignty, security and development interests, and to uphold lasting prosperity and stability in Hong Kong.
我要重申，香港事务纯属中国内政，任何外国政府、组织、个人都无权干预。
I reiterate that Hong Kong affairs are purely China's internal affairs. No country, organization or individual shall interfere.
英方对香港无主权、无治权、无监督权，不存在所谓“责任”。
The UK has no sovereignty, no jurisdiction and no right to supervise Hong Kong after the handover. The "responsibility" it claims is simply non-existent.
香港是中国的香港，我们要求英方正视现实，尊重中国主权，停止发表有关报告，停止以任何方式插手香港事务，干涉中国内政。
Hong Kong is part of China. We urge the British side to come to terms with reality, respect China's sovereignty, stop releasing relevant reports, and stop meddling in Hong Kong affairs and interfering in China's domestic affairs.
问：你刚刚发布了中方设立中国政府欧洲事务特别代表的消息。能否介绍一下，中方为何此时设立特别代表？
Further to your announcement on the Special Representative of the Chinese Government on European Affairs, could you explain why the Chinese government decided to set up this new office at this time?
答：中欧作为世界上两支重要力量，已经形成全方位、多层次、宽领域的合作格局，在维护多边主义和自由贸易、建设开放型世界经济等方面拥有重要共识和广泛共同利益。
As two major forces in the world, China and Europe have established an all-dimensional, multi-tiered and wide-ranging cooperation framework. The two sides share important consensus and broad common interests in safeguarding multilateralism and free trade and building an open world economy.
设立中国政府欧洲事务特别代表，有助于双方加强沟通、协调与合作，深化互信、创新进取，共同推动中欧关系在新时期取得更大发展。
Establishing the Special Representative of the Chinese Government on European Affairs will help the two sides strengthen communication, coordination and cooperation and deepen mutual trust and innovative thinking to bring greater progress in China-EU relations in a new era.
问：近日有媒体报道称，某美国乐团3名韩国籍演奏人员在纽约申请来华签证时被拒，原因是中方对美国在韩国部署“萨德”导弹系统采取的报复措施。
There are media reports recently saying that China visa applications of a US orchestra's three ROK musicians were denied in New York as a retaliatory measure for the US deployment of THAAD in the ROK.
上述情况是否属实？
Could you confirm that?
答：前天，已经有韩国媒体在记者会上问过这个问题了，我当时已经作了原则回应。
An ROK journalist raised this same question here the day before yesterday and I offered a principled response.
本着负责任的态度，会后我们又作了进一步的了解与核实。据我们掌握，截至目前，中国驻纽约总领馆从来没有收到过有关美国乐团韩国籍演奏人员的赴华签证申请，因此不存在所谓的“拒签”一说。
After further verification, we learned that the Chinese consulate-general in New York has never received any visa applications from ROK musicians of the said US orchestra, let alone "denying" them.
当前中韩各领域交流合作日益深化，人文交往十分活跃。
I would like to stress that China and the ROK enjoy deep exchange and cooperation in various fields, including vibrant people-to-people and cultural exchange.
去年中韩人员往来达到940多万人次，今年有望进一步增加。
Last year, more than 9.4 million visits were made between the two sides. This year, the figure is expected to go up even higher.
就在上个月，还有40多名韩国演艺人员在青岛参加了“中日韩文化交流联合演出”活动。
Just last month, over 40 people from the ROK entertainment industry participated in a joint performance in Qingdao as part of a China-Japan-ROK cultural exchange event.
我要强调，我们愿与韩方一道，加强两国间的人文交流，不断夯实两国友好的民间基础。
We stand ready to work with the ROK side to enhance people-to-people and cultural exchange and to consolidate the foundation of bilateral friendship.
问：据报道，周四，美国总统特朗普称，中美正在选择两国元首签署第一阶段经贸协议的新地点。
US President Trump said on Thursday that China and the US are working on selecting a venue for signing the phase one trade agreement.
中方建议的新地点是哪里？将在何时签署协议？
Do you have any more details on what venue China is suggesting and when the meeting will take place?
答：关于中美经贸问题，我昨天已作过回应。
I already responded to questions on the China-US trade issues yesterday.
中美双方一直就经贸问题保持着密切的沟通。
The two sides have all along maintained close communication.
10月10日至11日，双方举行了第13轮中美经贸高级别磋商。
The 13th round of consultations was held from October 10 to 11.
25日，双方牵头人进行了通话。今天，双方牵头人将再次进行通话。
Heads of the two teams had a telephone call on October 25 and have another one scheduled today.
目前磋商进展顺利，双方将按原计划继续推进磋商等各项工作。
The consultations are progressing smoothly and both sides will press ahead with their work as planned.
我们希望双方能在相互尊重、平等互利的基础上找到妥善解决经贸问题的办法。
It is China's hope that the two sides can find a way to resolve the economic and trade issues on the basis of mutual respect, equality and mutual benefit.
至于你关心的中美元首会晤问题，我想指出的是，两国元首一直通过各种方式保持着联系。
As to whether the two heads of state will meet, I can tell you that they maintain contact through various means.
问：据报道，美国内政部已确认停飞中国制造的无人机。
The US Department of Interior has confirmed the reports that it is grounding Chinese-made drones.
答：昨天我已就此事作出了回应。
I responded to this yesterday.
你昨天来了吗？（记者摇头）
Were you here then?
对于此事，我们还需要进一步了解具体情况。
We have yet to gather more information about the situation.
这里我可以告诉你的是，我们敦促美方停止泛化国家安全概念，停止渲染“中国威胁论”，停止无理打压中国企业。
What I can tell you is that we urge the US to stop abusing the concept of national security, stop spreading the "China threat" narrative and stop wantonly oppressing Chinese enterprises.
我们希望美方能为中国企业在美国的正常经营活动提供公平、公正和非歧视的环境。
We hope it will provide a fair, just and non-discriminatory environment for Chinese businesses in the US.
问：据报道，朝鲜周四宣布成功试射超大型火箭炮。
North Korea said on Thursday that it successfully tested "super-large" multiple rocket launchers.
答：中方注意到有关情况。
We noted this.
当前半岛形势处于重要时期，我们呼吁有关各方珍惜来之不易的缓和局面，致力于通过对话协商解决问题，为推动半岛无核化、实现半岛和地区的长治久安作出积极努力。
The situation on the Peninsula is at an important stage. We call on parties concerned to cherish the hard-won amelioration, resolve the issue through dialogue and consultation and make vigorous efforts for denuclearization at an early date and lasting peace and stability on the Peninsula and in the region.
问：有媒体报道，中方已向美方建议在澳门举行中美元首会晤，并签署中美经贸磋商第一阶段协议。
There are media reports that China has suggested to the US that the two presidents meet in Macao to sign a phase one trade agreement.
你能否证实？
Is that true?
答：这纯属臆测。
That's just a groundless assumption.
问：据报道，10月31日，巴基斯坦一辆火车在旁遮普省起火，造成超过70人遇难，数十人受伤。
On October 31 in Pakistan, more than 70 people were killed and dozens injured after a passenger train caught fire in Punjab province.
答：我们看到了有关报道。这是一起非常不幸的事件。
We noted reports on this very unfortunate incident.
我们对火灾的遇难者表示深切哀悼，对遇难者的家属和有关受伤人员表示慰问。
We express deep condolences for the passing of the victims and sincere sympathies to the bereaved families and the injured.
问：关于印度宣布成立“查谟和克什米尔中央直辖区”和“拉达克中央直辖区”，你是否有新情况可以提供？
Do you have anything new on the Indian government's decision to establish the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir and the Union Territory of Ladakh?
答：你问的都是我昨天回答过的问题。
This is another question I responded to yesterday.
既然你这么关心，我可以再重复一遍。
As you are interested, I will repeat my answer.
印方近日宣布正式成立所谓的“查谟和克什米尔中央直辖区”和“拉达克中央直辖区”，将部分中国领土划入印度行政管辖范围，中方对此表示强烈不满和坚决反对。
The Indian government announced recently the establishment of the so-called "Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir" and "Union Territory of Ladakh", placing part of Chinese territory under Indian administration. China deplores and firmly opposes that.
印方通过单方面修改国内法律和行政区划的方式，挑战中国主权权益。
India is challenging China's sovereign rights and interests by unilaterally revising domestic law and administrative division.
这一做法是非法、无效的，不会改变有关地区在中国实际控制下的事实，不会产生任何效力。
This is illegal, null and void. It will neither change the fact that the relevant region is under China's actual control nor produce any effect.
中方敦促印方切实尊重中方领土主权，恪守双方达成的有关协定，以实际行动维护中印边境地区的和平与安宁，为两国妥善解决边界问题创造有利条件。
We urge India to respect China's territorial sovereignty, abide by bilateral agreements, and safeguard the peace and tranquility in the border region with concrete actions to create conditions for a proper settlement of the boundary issue with China.
问：据报道，美方确认将不会派任何高级别代表参加在上海举行的第二届中国国际进口博览会。
The US confirmed today that it will not be sending any high-level representatives to the second China International Import Expo in Shanghai next week.
答：第二届中国国际进口博览会将于11月5日至10日在上海举行。
The second China International Import Expo (CIIE) will be held in Shanghai from November 5 to 10.
截至目前，共有63个国家将来华参加国家展，来自150多个国家和地区的3000多家企业将参加企业展，数量超过了首届。
So far 63 countries have registered for country exhibition and over 3,000 businesses from more than 150 countries and regions will be attending the business exhibition, exceeding the number at the first CIIE.
至于美方表示他们不会派高级别代表来参加进博会，我想，他们来，我们欢迎。
You said the US would not be sending any high-level representatives to the second CIIE. I would like to say that they are welcome to attend the event if they'd like to come.
他们不来，也没有什么大不了。
But if they don't, it's no big deal.
前两天我在这里介绍过，目前报名参展的美国企业数量达到192家，比去年增长18%，美方参展面积达4.75万平方米，居各参展国首位。
Like I said the other day, 192 American businesses have registered to attend the exhibitions, an 18 percent increase compared to last year. Their total exhibition area is about 47,500 square meters, the biggest among all participating countries.
这再次说明，美国企业看好中国的经济前景，看好中国的市场潜力，愿意继续投资中国，愿意继续深化与中方的务实合作。
This again shows that American businesses are optimistic about China's economic prospects and market potential. They are ready to increase investment in and deepen cooperation with China.
我想这更为重要。
I believe this matters more.
毕竟跟中国做生意的、跟中国开展具体经贸合作的，是美国的企业。
After all, it is American enterprises that are doing business and conducting trade and economic cooperation with China.
这里我要重申，中美经贸合作的本质是互利共赢，双方经贸关系中出现一些问题在所难免，关键是双方要本着相互尊重、平等相待的精神妥善加以解决。
I would like to reiterate that China-US trade and economic cooperation is win-win in nature. It's only natural to encounter some problems in this process, but the key is to properly resolve them with mutual respect and equality.
搞单边主义、保护主义和霸凌行径于事无补，根本解决不了问题。
Unilateralism, protectionism and bullying practice won't help at all and will by no means solve any problem.
2019年10月31日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on October 31, 2019
问：据巴基斯坦媒体报道，一位中国高级外交官表示，中方反对将巴基斯坦列入FATF黑名单。
According to Pakistani media reports, a senior Chinese foreign ministry official has said that China is opposed to blacklisting Pakistan by FATF.
这是否代表中方原则立场？如果到2020年2月，巴基斯坦仍没有采取措施，中方是否仍持上述立场？
Is this the Chinese position in principle? Will that be the Chinese position even if Pakistan does not take necessary actions by February 2020 as prescribed by FATF?
答：金融行动特别工作组（FATF）是就反洗钱、打击恐怖融资活动开展国际合作的重要平台。
FATF is an important platform for international cooperation in anti-money laundering and countering the financing of terrorist activities.
FATF的宗旨和目标，是帮助各国更好地打击洗钱、恐怖融资等非法活动，防止国际金融体系遭到滥用，而不是制裁或惩罚其他国家。
Its purpose is helping countries better combat such illegal activities as money laundering and terrorist financing, rather than sanctioning or punishing any country. Not long ago, the FATF plenary meeting decided to keep Pakistan's rating unchanged.
不久前，FATF全会决定维持对巴基斯坦的评级，反映了FATF成员肯定巴基斯坦改进反恐怖融资体系进展、鼓励巴基斯坦继续努力的共同意见，这也符合FATF帮助各国打击恐怖融资活动、维护国际金融体系安全的宗旨和目标。
It shows the FATF membership's recognition of Pakistan's progress in improving the system of countering the financing of terrorism, as well as encouragement for Pakistan's efforts. This is in line with the FATF purpose of fighting terrorist financing and upholding the security of the international financial system.
中方支持巴基斯坦完善国内反恐怖融资体系的努力，将同FATF各方一道，继续向巴方提供建设性的支持和帮助。
China supports Pakistan's efforts to improve its counter-terrorism financing system and will work with other FATF members to provide more constructive support and assistance to Pakistan.
问：据报道，30日，智利总统皮涅拉发表电视讲话称，由于抗议活动持续，智利取消主办原定于11月举行的亚太经合组织（APEC）领导人非正式会议。
On October 30, Chilean President Pi?era announced in a televised speech that due to continuous protests, Chile decided to call off the upcoming APEC Economic Leaders' Meeting in Chile.
中方对此有何评论？中方对APEC机制有何评价，将发挥怎样的作用？
Does China have any comment on that? How does China see the APEC mechanism? What role is China going to play?
答：我想大家可能都已经注意到了，昨天，智利方面对外宣布将取消主办原定于11月举行的亚太经合组织（APEC）领导人非正式会议。
You've probably all noticed that Chile announced the cancellation of the planned APEC Economic Leaders' Meeting in November.
中方理解和尊重智方的决定，我们相信智利政府和人民有能力维护国家稳定和社会安宁，尽快恢复国内正常秩序。
China understands and respects Chile's decision. We believe the Chilean government and people have the capability to maintain national stability and social peace, and restore order at home at an early date.
今年，智利作为东道主，为筹备APEC领导人会议作了大量工作，推动APEC诸多重点领域合作取得积极进展。
As the host of this year's APEC Economic Leaders' Meeting, Chile has made much efforts to prepare for the event and advanced APEC cooperation in many key areas.
中方对此给予积极评价。
China commends that.
APEC是亚太地区重要的经济合作平台，为促进亚太地区经济发展和民生改善作出了重要贡献。
As an important economic cooperation platform in the Asia-Pacific, APEC has made important contributions to promoting economic development and improving livelihood in this region.
中方重视APEC，长期深入参与APEC各领域合作，作出了实实在在的努力和贡献。
China attaches importance to it. We have long been deeply engaged in APEC cooperation in various fields with tangible contributions.
当前，APEC合作机遇与挑战并存。
APEC cooperation now faces both opportunities and challenges.
中方愿与各方秉持亚太伙伴精神，坚持APEC合作的宗旨和原则，维护亚太合作的正确方向，共同推动APEC在亚太和全球经济合作中继续发挥重要作用。
China is ready to work with other parties to follow the spirit of Asia-Pacific partnership, stay committed to the principles and purposes of APEC cooperation, keep to the right course of Asia-Pacific cooperation and ensure that APEC will continue to play an important role in economic cooperation in the Asia-Pacific and beyond.
问：智利APEC领导人非正式会议的取消是否会影响中美经贸磋商进程？特朗普总统是否会到中国来签署协议？
Will the cancellation of the APEC summit affect the progress of the US-China trade deal? Is there a chance President Trump will come to China to sign the deal instead?
答：你应该注意到了，今天上午晚些时候，商务部新闻发言人已就此作出了回应。
You may have noted the response from the spokesperson of the Ministry of Commerce this morning.
这里我愿再次强调，关于中美经贸问题，中美双方一直保持着密切沟通。
I would like to reiterate that regarding the economic and trade issues between China and the US, the two sides have all along maintained close communication.
10月10日至11日，双方举行了第13轮中美经贸高级别磋商。
From October 10 to 11, the 13th round of talks was held.
25日，双方牵头人进行了通话。双方牵头人还将于本周五再次进行通话。
The heads of the two teams had a telephone call on October 25 and have another one scheduled this Friday.
还是那句话，我们希望双方能在相互尊重、平等互利的基础上找到妥善解决经贸问题的办法。
As we've been saying, it is China's hope that the two sides can find a way to resolve the economic and trade issues on the basis of mutual respect, equality and mutual benefit.
至于你关心的中美元首会晤，我想指出的是，两国元首一直通过各种方式保持着联系。
As to whether the two heads of state will meet, I can tell you that they maintain contact through various means.
问：据报道，印度政府于10月31日正式实施《查谟—克什米尔重组法》，成立“查谟—克什米尔中央直辖区”和“拉达克中央直辖区”，分别在斯利那加和列城举行两区邦长就职仪式。
The Indian government today established the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir and the Union Territory of Ladakh following the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019. Lieutenant governors for the two UTs were sworn in respectively in Srinagar and Leh.
中方对此有何评论？
I wonder if China has any comments?
答：印度政府正式宣布成立的所谓“查谟和克什米尔中央直辖区”和“拉达克中央直辖区”，将部分中国领土划入印度行政管辖范围，中方对此表示强烈不满和坚决反对。
The Indian government officially announced the establishment of the so-called "Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir" and "Union Territory of Ladakh", placing part of Chinese territory under Indian administration. China deplores and firmly opposes this.
这一做法是非法的、无效的，不会改变有关地区在中国实际控制下的事实，不会产生任何效力。
This is illegal, null and void. It will neither change the fact that the relevant region is under China's actual control nor produce any effect.
中方敦促印方切实尊重中方领土主权，恪守双方达成的有关协定，以实际行动维护中印边境地区的和平与安宁，为两国妥善解决边界问题创造条件。
We urge India to respect China's territorial sovereignty, abide by bilateral agreements, and safeguard the peace and tranquility in the border region with concrete actions to create conditions for a proper settlement of the border issue with China.
中方在克什米尔问题上的立场是一贯和明确的。
China's position on the issue of Kashmir is consistent and clear.
这一问题是历史遗留下来的争议，应当根据《联合国宪章》、相关安理会决议以及双边协定，以和平方式妥善解决。
It is a dispute left over from history and should be resolved properly and peacefully in accordance with the UN Charter, relevant Security Council resolutions and bilateral agreements.
有关方面应通过对话协商解决有关争议，维护地区的和平稳定。
Parties to the issue should resolve disputes through dialogue and consultation to maintain peace and stability in the region.
问：据报道，美国务卿蓬佩奥10月30日在纽约哈德逊研究所发表演讲，称中国共产党敌视美国和美式价值观，给美国和全世界带来挑战。
US Secretary of State Pompeo delivered a speech at the Hudson Institute in New York on October 30, saying that the Chinese Communist Party is hostile to the United States and American values, posing challenges to the US and the world.
答：蓬佩奥上述讲话恶毒攻击中国共产党和中国政府，挑拨中国共产党同中国人民的关系，蓄意歪曲诬蔑中国内外政策，充分暴露了美国一小撮政客根深蒂固的政治偏见及其阴暗的反共心理。
Mr. Pompeo's speech maliciously attacked the Communist Party of China and the Chinese government, tried to drive a wedge between the CPC and the Chinese people and deliberately distorted and slandered China's domestic and foreign policy. It fully exposes the deep-seated political prejudice and dark anti-communist mindset of a handful of American politicians.
这种言论体现的不是自信和力量，暴露的是傲慢与恐惧。
Such remarks are by no means an embodiment of confidence and strength, but rather reveal fear and arrogance.
新中国成立70年来，在中国共产党坚强领导下，中国取得了举世瞩目的发展成就，中国的朋友圈越来越大。
Under the leadership of the CPC, China has made remarkable achievements and made more and more friends over the past seven decades since the founding of the New China.
中国人民将坚定不移沿着中国特色社会主义道路走下去，并不断取得新的辉煌。
The Chinese people will firmly forge ahead along the path of socialism with Chinese characteristics to new glories.
邪不压正。
Good prevails over evil.
任何诋毁抹黑中国，阻挠中国稳定发展的图谋都是徒劳的，也注定会失败！
Any attempt to vilify China and obstruct its steady development is futile and doomed to fail.
历史和现实充分证明，中美合则两利、斗则俱伤；相互尊重、求同存异是国与国的相处之道。
The past and reality has proven that China and the US stand to gain from cooperation and lose from confrontation. Mutual respect and seeking common ground while shelving differences is the right way for countries to get along.
我们敦促美方官员反省和纠正错误，停止损害中美关系的言行，同中方相向而行，按照两国元首确定的原则和方向，在相互尊重的基础上管控分歧，在互利互惠的基础上拓展合作，共同推进以协调、合作、稳定为基调的中美关系。
We urge US officials to reflect upon and correct their wrongdoing, and stop saying or doing things that harm China-US relations. They should meet us halfway, and following the principle and direction set by the two heads of state, manage differences on the basis of mutual respect, expand mutually-beneficial cooperation, and advance China-US relations featuring coordination, cooperation and stability.
问：据报道，朝鲜牡丹峰乐团将于今年12月在中国11个城市巡回演出。
The DPRK's Moranbong Band is expected to go on a concert tour in 11 Chinese cities this December.
中方对此有何评论？中朝领导人是否计划在今年内举行会晤？
I wonder if you have a comment? Is there a plan for Chinese and DPRK leaders to meet within this year?
答：我不了解你提到的情况，可以在会后核实一下。
I am not aware of what you said. Let me check afterwards.
我可以告诉你的是，当前，中朝之间在各层级、各领域都保持着正常的交流与合作。
I can tell you that China and the DPRK maintain normal exchange and cooperation at various levels and in various sectors.
问：据报道，近80名日本著名专家就北海道大学一名教授被中方拘留事联名发表声明，称对此表示深切担忧，敦促中方披露相关细节，并称中方在未透露任何背景和原因的情况下就拘留了该教授，这让国际社会无法接受，会不可避免地损害中国形象，让外界不信任中国。
According to reports, nearly 80 Japanese experts issued a joint statement on China's detention of a Hokkaido University professor, expressing deep concerns and urging China to reveal details. They claim that China detained the professor without disclosing any background or reason, which is unacceptable to the international community and will inevitably harm China's image, possibly leading to mistrust.
他们还称将取消对中国的访问，中日之间的交流合作越来越多，中方的做法对中日间学术交流产生了不利影响。
Besides claiming to cancel visits to China, they also said that while exchange and cooperation between China and Japan increases, China's conduct has negatively affected academic exchange.
中方对此有何回应？
I wonder if you have a response?
耿爽：你提到的声明是日本什么人士发表的？
Who issued the statement you mentioned?
记者：日本学者发表的声明。
Journalist: Some Japanese academics.
耿爽：你知道是哪些学者吗？
Do you know who they are?
记者：知道。我只知道他们的日文名字，他们是日中关系的研究人员。
Journalist: Yes, I know their names in Japanese. They are researchers in Japan-China relations.
答：我还没有看到你提到的这个声明，会在会后关注一下。
I haven't seen the statement and will check for it afterwards. But I would like to make two points.
但第一，我想发表声明的日本学者可能未必了解事情的真相；第二，他们可能有些言过其实，也有些多虑了。
First, the academics may not be aware of the truth of this case. Second, they may have overstated the matter and read too much into it.
中日之间的交流以及中国同国际社会之间的交流是非常畅通的，也是非常有效的，并不会因为一两个孤立的事件受到任何影响。
There are open and effective channels for exchange between China and the international community, including Japan. This will not be affected by one or two cases.
至于你刚才提到的北海道教授的案件，我的同事此前也在这里介绍过。中方依法对涉嫌违反中国法律的外国公民进行处置。
Regarding the case about the Hokkaido University professor, as my colleague stated here, the Chinese side lawfully handles cases involving foreign citizens who have broken Chinese law.
我们根据《中日领事协定》相关规定，为日方履行领事职务提供必要协助。
Pursuant to the Agreement on Consular Relations Between China and Japan, the Chinese side has offered necessary assistance to the Japanese side in fulfilling consular duties.
这点你可以去核实。
You may verify that if you'd like to.
我们希望日方能够提醒本国公民遵守中国的法律法规，不在华从事违法犯罪活动。
We hope the Japanese side will remind its citizens in China to comply with Chinese laws and regulations and not conduct any illegal activities.
中国的大门是敞开的。
China's door to the world is wide open.
我们欢迎包括日本在内的各国学者和游客到中国来，但前提是要遵守中国的法律法规。
Academics and tourists from other countries, including Japan, are welcome to China. But the precondition is that they need to comply with Chinese laws and regulations.
如果有违法犯罪行为，当然会依法受到处置。
Illegal and criminal activities will be dealt with in accordance with law.
问：据报道，近期，比利时孔子学院院长宋新宁因涉嫌从事间谍活动被拒签，8年内不得进入申根区。
There's a head of Confucius Institute in Belgium, Song Xinning, who was recently denied visa and banned from the Schengen area for eight years based on suspicions that he was conducting espionage for the Chinese government.
中方对此有何评论？第二个问题，中方是否掌握其他孔子学院教授或员工因涉嫌间谍活动被拒签的情况？
What kind of comment does the Chinese side have on this? In a follow-up related question, are you aware of any other cases of Chinese professors or staffers of Confucius Institutes being denied visas for possible spying?
答：关于你刚才提到的这起个案，我在媒体上也注意到了。我们专门就此向有关部门进行了了解。
I saw that in the news and specifically checked that with the competent authority.
根据我了解的情况，宋新宁是中国人民大学国际关系学院教授，是欧洲研究专家，曾于2010年被欧盟委员会授予“让·莫内讲座教授”。
Based on what I have learned, Mr. Song Xinning is a professor at the School of International Relations, Renmin University of China, and an expert on European studies. In 2010, he was awarded a Jean Monnet Chair by the European Commission.
宋新宁教授于2016年4月被中国人民大学选派担任比利时荷语布鲁塞尔自由大学孔子学院中方院长，2019年7月31日任期期满回国。
In April 2016, Professor Song was appointed the Chinese head of the Confucius Institute at Vrije Universiteit Brussel. On July 31, 2019, he returned to China upon completing his tenure there.
近日，有比利时媒体报道，诬称宋新宁教授在比利时当地的中国商界和学术界招募谍报人员。
A recent Belgian media report falsely accused him of working as a recruiter for intelligence services in Belgium's business and academic sectors that involve the local Chinese community.
这完全是不实之词，别有用心。
That is a fabricated allegation driven by ulterior motives.
我们坚决反对这种妨碍正常交流活动和教育合作项目的行为。
We are firmly against such conduct that hampers academic exchange and education cooperation projects.
据我了解，宋新宁教授已致信该报道的记者，对不实报道提出抗议并委托比利时律师向法院提起上诉，要求比方拿出证据。
I understand Professor Song has already written to the journalist to protest the false report. He has also appointed a Belgian lawyer to file a lawsuit, demanding the Belgian side to present evidence.
我们期待法院对此作出公正的判决。
We look forward to a just ruling from the court.
关于你的第二个问题，具体情况我现在不掌握。
On your second question, I am not aware of the specific situation.
我可以告诉你的是，孔子学院是世界认识中国的重要窗口，宗旨是帮助各国人民学习汉语，了解中国，加强中国与各国教育、文化的交流合作，增进相互理解与友谊。
I would like to say that Confucius Institutes serves as a window of China to the world. Their purpose is to help people of other countries to learn the Chinese language, get to know China, advance educational and cultural exchange and cooperation with China, and enhance mutual understanding and friendship.
一段时间以来，一些媒体特别是一些西方媒体对孔院有一些不实和歪曲报道，包括所谓的间谍问题，事后都被证明是子虚乌有。
For some time, certain media, some Western ones in particular, have published fictitious reports on them, including stories about espionage. They have all been proven to be groundless.
我们希望有关方面在看待孔子学院时要从事实出发，不要进行主观臆断，也不要从自身偏见出发，对孔院进行污蔑和抹黑。
We hope relevant sides will base their decisions on facts instead of subjective interpretations, and stop slandering Confucius Institutes out of prejudice.
问：巴基斯坦媒体援引一名中国高级外交官的话称，相较于中巴关系，中印关系存在信任赤字。中国国家主席习近平和印度总理莫迪不久前在金奈举行了非正式会晤。
According to some Pakistani media reports, a senior official from the Chinese foreign ministry has been quoted as saying that there is a trust deficit between China and India in contrast to that between Pakistan and China.
在上述背景下，你同意这种看法吗？
Would you agree to this point of view in the light of the recently-concluded informal summit between President Xi and Prime Minister Modi in Chennai?
答：关于习主席与莫迪总理在金奈举行的非正式会晤，双方都发布了消息稿，会晤取得了圆满成功。
Regarding the informal meeting between President Xi and Prime Minister Modi in Chennai, both sides have issued press releases.
两国领导人在非常友好的气氛中，就国际和地区的全局性、长期性、战略性问题深入交换意见，一致同意加强两国更加紧密的发展伙伴关系。
It was a successful meeting where the two leaders had an in-depth exchange of views on overarching, long-term and strategic international and regional issues in a very friendly atmosphere and agreed to forge an even closer partnership.
两国领导人同时也就如何深化双方在各领域下一阶段的合作作出了规划，这其中就包括人文领域的合作。
The two leaders also planned to deepen cooperation in various sectors, including in people-to-people and cultural exchange.
中印两国的人文交流与合作在过去几年发展迅速，取得了积极成果，双方也建有高级别人文交流机制。
There has been rapid progress in this area in the past few years with many outcomes.
在这一机制框架下，两国各部门充分对接，进行了一系列富有成果的合作。
Under exchange mechanisms in place, relevant departments on the two sides worked hand in hand and delivered fruitful results.
这对于促进中印两国人民之间的相互理解，增进两国人民之间的互信具有非凡意义。
All these are of extraordinary significance to promoting mutual understanding and trust between our two peoples.
我们愿同印方一道，在高级别人文交流机制下，不断夯实中印关系发展的人文和民意基础。
We stand ready to work with the Indian side under these mechanisms to further strengthen the cultural and people-to-people bond for better bilateral relations.
你刚才也提到巴基斯坦，巴基斯坦是中国的全天候战略合作伙伴，中巴友谊牢不可破。
You also mentioned Pakistan. It is China's all-weather strategic cooperative partner. The China-Pakistan friendship is unbreakable.
问：中国无人机制造商大疆称，美国内政部已禁飞所有中国制造或使用中国制造配件的无人机，除非出于紧急目的。
Chinese drone maker DJI has said that the US Department of Interior has grounded all non-emergency Chinese-made or part-made drones.
同时，有报告称这将影响所有中国制造的无人机或无人机配件。
Reports say this is affecting all Chinese-made drones or drone parts.
你是否知情？对此有何评论？
Are you aware of this? Can you give the ministry's comment on this?
答：我也是在记者会前刚刚看到有关报道。具体情况我还需要去了解一下。
I noticed the report just before the press conference and will need to check for more information.
这里我可以给你一个原则回应。
I can offer a principled response.
我们希望美方摒弃冷战思维和零和博弈的过时观念，停止泛化国家安全概念，停止渲染“中国威胁论”，停止对中国企业的无端打压。
We hope the US will discard its outdated Cold War thinking and zero-sum game mindset, stop abusing the concept of national security, stop weaving the "China threat" narrative, and stop the wanton oppression of Chinese enterprises.
希望美方为中国企业在美正常经营活动提供公平、公正和非歧视的环境。
It should provide a fair, just and non-discriminatory environment for Chinese businesses in the US.
同时，我们一贯鼓励中国企业在遵守国际规则和当地法律法规基础上对外开展合作。
In the meantime, we ask Chinese enterprises to observe international rules and local laws and regulations while doing business overseas.
2019年10月30日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on October 30, 2019
应马达加斯加共和国政府、纳米比亚共和国政府、加纳共和国政府邀请，国务院副总理孙春兰将于11月4日至13日对上述三国进行正式友好访问。
At the invitation of the governments of the Republic of Madagascar, the Republic of Namibia, and the Republic of Ghana, Vice Premier Sun Chunlan of the State Council will pay official, friendly visits to the three countries from November 4 to 13.
问：据报道，一名美国政府高官称，中美第一阶段经贸协议可能无法如预期的那样，在中美元首智利会晤时签署，但这并不意味着协议破裂。
A senior US administration official says that the phase one of the China-US trade deal may not be completed in time for signing when the two heads of state meet in Chile next month as expected. However, this does not mean the trade deal is falling apart.
中方是否预期在智利APEC领导人非正式会议期间签署第一阶段协议？
Does China expect the phase one of the trade deal to be signed during the APEC summit in Chile?
答：关于中美经贸磋商的具体情况和进展，建议你向主管部门询问。
Regarding the specifics and progress in the trade consultations, I would refer you to the competent authority.
我这里可以再重申一下我们的原则立场，关于中美经贸问题，在不久前结束的第13轮高级别磋商中，中美双方在部分协议磋商上取得实质性进展。
I will reiterate our principled position on the economic and trade issues between China and the US. The two sides made substantial progress in some of the consultations towards an agreement in the recently-concluded 13th round of talks.
25日，双方牵头人进行了通话，同意妥善解决各自核心关切，确认部分文本的技术性磋商基本完成。
On October 25, the heads of the two teams agreed in a telephone call to properly address each other's core concerns and affirmed that technical consultations on part of the text has been basically completed.
双方牵头人将于近期再次通话，在此期间两国工作层将持续抓紧磋商。
They will have another telephone call shortly. In the meantime, working-level consultations will be continued at a fast pace.
问：我们注意到，近日，经济与合作发展组织发布数据显示，2019年上半年全球外国直接投资较2018年下半年下降了20%。
According to data from the OECD, global FDI flows fell by a fifth in the first six months of 2019 compared with the second half of the previous year.
其中，流入美国的外国直接投资下降超过25%，但流入中国的外国直接投资却增加了5%。
FDI flows into the US dropped by more than a quarter. By contrast, flows to China increased by 5 percent.
答：我注意到了经合组织发布的这组数据，我想它很能反映一些实际问题。
I noted these statistics released by the OECD, which I believe speak volumes about some facts.
第一，数据显示，2019年上半年全球外国直接投资环比下降。这再次说明，当前全球投资环境有所恶化。
First, the fall of FDI in the first half of this year further testifies to the worsening of global investment environment.
我想大家都明白，这其中保护主义、单边主义是最大的制约因素。
The biggest factor leading to this situation is protectionism and unilateralism.
第二，今年上半年，流入美国的外国直接投资大幅下降，流入中国的却不降反升。
Second, FDI flows into the US dropped dramatically while flows to China increased.
这再次说明，是谁在日益开放，是谁在日趋保守。我想这是一目了然的。
It cannot be more obvious who is becoming more open and who is becoming more conservative.
再过几天，第二届中国国际进口博览会将在上海举行。
In a few days, the second China International Import Expo (CIIE) will be held in Shanghai.
截至目前，共有63个国家将来华参加国家展，来自150多个国家和地区的3000多家企业将参加企业展。
So far 63 countries have registered for country exhibition and over 3,000 businesses from more than 150 countries and regions will be attending business exhibition.
特别值得一提的是，参展的美国企业数量达到192家，比去年增长18%，美方参展面积达4.75万平方米，居各参展国首位。
It is worth mentioning that 192 American businesses will attend the exhibitions, an 18 percent increase compared to last year, with a total exhibition area of about 47,500 square meters, the biggest among all participating countries.
这再次说明，包括美国企业在内的各国企业均看好中国经济前景，看好中国市场潜力，愿意继续投资中国，愿意继续与中方深化合作。
This again shows that businesses from around the globe, including American ones, are optimistic about China's economic prospects and market potential. They are ready to continue investing in China and deepening cooperation with China.
我想我们应该去问一问那些参展的美国企业，他们愿不愿意撤出中国，答不答应所谓的中美“脱钩”。
Perhaps we should ask those American exhibitors whether they would like to leave China or see a "decoupling" of the two countries?
我愿重申，中国改革的步伐只会越来越快，开放的大门只会越来越大。
I shall reiterate that China's pace of reform will only become faster and the door will only open wider.
我们呼吁国际社会携手合作，共同抵制单边主义和保护主义，为各国投资者提供更加公平、公正、可预期的环境，创造更多发展机遇，共同促进全球贸易投资自由化与便利化，共同构建开放型世界经济。
We call on the international community to join hands against unilateralism and protectionism, provide a fairer, more just and predictable business environment for investors, create more development opportunities, promote global trade and investment liberalization and facilitation, and foster an open world economy.
问：据报道，29日，阿根廷常驻维也纳代表格罗西赢得国际原子能机构总干事选举。
According to media reports, Argentina's Permanent Representative to International Organizations in Vienna Rafael Grossi was elected Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on October 29.
答：中方祝贺阿根廷驻维也纳代表格罗西大使赢得国际原子能机构总干事选举。
China congratulates Argentina's Permanent Representative to International Organizations in Vienna Ambassador Grossi on his election as Director General of the IAEA.
国际原子能机构是核领域最具普遍性和权威性的政府间国际组织，承担着促进和平利用核能、防止核武器扩散等重要职能。
The IAEA is the most universal and authoritative inter-governmental organization in the nuclear field. It plays such important roles as promoting the peaceful use of nuclear energy and preventing proliferation of nuclear weapons.
中方希望格罗西大使带领国际原子能机构以客观、公正和专业的精神履行好职责，更好应对全球安全与发展挑战。
China hopes that Ambassador Grossi will lead the organization in fulfilling its functions in an objective, impartial and professional spirit to better deal with challenges to global security and development.
中方愿继续深化与国际原子能机构的务实合作，为增进国际和平与安全、促进世界可持续发展共同作出努力。
China stands ready to further deepen practical cooperation with the IAEA to jointly contribute to world peace, security and sustainable development.
问：澳大利亚前驻华大使芮捷锐近日在《澳金融评论报》刊文评论称，当前澳安全情报系统以“中国威胁论”主导对华政策，将中澳关系陷入僵冷视作功劳，使澳政府在多个涉华问题中决策失当。
Former Australian ambassador to China Geoff Raby said in an article published recently in the Australian Financial Review that the "China threat" narrative dominating China policy in Australia's security and intelligence system has effectively frozen bilateral relations and led to ill-advised decision-making on issues regarding China, which is seen by the Australian side as a badge of honor.
搞“麦克风外交”只会损害澳国家利益。他主张，“是时候让外交官重新主导澳对华政策了”。
He said that megaphone diplomacy will only harm Australia's national interests and declared "it is time for diplomats to be put back in charge of our foreign policy on China".
答：我们注意到有关报道。
We have taken note of relevant reports.
一段时间来，澳大利亚国内不少有识之士从澳国家和人民利益出发，对澳对华政策进行反思，从各自角度就如何改善对华关系提出了意见和建议。
For some time, people of vision in Australia, proceeding from the interests of Australia and Australians, have reflected upon the country's China policy and put forward suggestions on how to improve relations with China.
这些客观、理性的声音值得澳大利亚政府思考。
The Australian government should heed these objective and rational voices.
中方始终认为，一个健康稳定的中澳关系，符合两国人民根本利益。
It is China's consistent belief that a sound and stable China-Australia relationship serves the fundamental interests of both peoples.
希望澳方真正吸取中澳关系近年来经历波折的教训，客观、理性、公正地看待中国和中澳关系，坚持相互尊重、平等相待，采取实际举措增进互信、拓展合作、管控分歧，推动两国关系健康稳定向前发展。
We hope the Australian side will learn from the setbacks in our relations in recent years, look at China and China-Australia relations in an objective, rational and just manner, adhere to the principle of mutual respect and equality, and take concrete measures to enhance mutual trust, expand cooperation and manage differences to ensure the sound and steady development of bilateral relations.
问：据报道，昨日，澳大利亚外长佩恩发表强硬涉华评论称，澳将持续向中国提出人权问题。
Last night, Australian Foreign Minister Payne made some quite strong comments about China, saying that Australia will continue to speak out about human rights issues in China.
中方是否对其言论表示反对或感到不满？
Is China opposed or upset at what she said last night on China?
答：我们注意到澳外长在有关演讲中积极评价中国发展和中澳关系，表示愿同中方发展全面战略伙伴关系，妥善管控分歧，我们对此表示赞赏。
We note that the Australian Foreign Minister spoke positively about China's development and China-Australia relations and expressed readiness to develop comprehensive strategic partnership with China and to properly manage differences. We appreciate that.
但她在同一场合也罔顾事实，出于政治需要拿所谓的涉疆问题说事，这样做很不好，也无益于两国关系的改善和发展。
However, on the same occasion, she also made an issue of Xinjiang to serve political purposes in total disregard of facts. Such ill-advised remarks will not help to improve or grow relations with China.
中方已就此向澳方提出严正交涉，指出她的这一做法很不合适。
We have lodged stern representations to the Australian side and pointed out the inappropriate nature of her conduct.
中方多次表明，一个健康稳定的中澳关系符合两国的根本利益。
We have repeatedly stated that a sound and stable China-Australia relationship serves the fundamental interests of both peoples.
我们希望澳方反思和吸取一段时间来中澳关系经历波折的教训，与中方相向而行，不要干进一步、退两步的事。
We hope the Australian side will reflect upon and learn from recent setbacks in our relations and meet China halfway rather than take one step forward and two steps backward.
另外，刚才记者提问时提到澳大利亚有关人士发表文章中的观点，值得澳大利亚政府认真对待。
Besides, the Australian government should really give some thought to the views in the article mentioned in the previous question.
问：美国、英国等一些国家在联合国大会第三委员会与消除种族歧视委员会互动对话时发表共同发言，批评中国的涉疆政策。
The US, the UK and some other countries criticized China's Xinjiang policy at the UNGA Third Committee session on the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD).
我们也注意到，很多发展中国家发表共同发言支持中方涉疆问题立场，反对西方国家的言论。
We noted that many developing countries delivered a joint statement in support of China's stance on Xinjiang and against the remarks by those Western countries.
中方有何评论？
What's your comment?
答：10月29日，在第74届联大三委同联合国消除种族歧视委员会举行的互动对话会上，美国、英国等少数西方国家，就涉疆问题攻击诬蔑中方。
At the Third Committee session on the CERD of the 74th UNGA on October 29, the US and the UK, among a handful of Western countries, attacked and slandered China on Xinjiang-related issues.
当场有60多个国家踊跃发言，支持中方在涉疆问题上的立场，称赞中国巨大人权进步和治疆政策，反对借人权问题干涉中国内政。
More than 60 countries attending the session spoke in support of China's position on Xinjiang, commending China's tremendous human rights progress and Xinjiang policy, and expressing opposition to interference in China's domestic affairs under the pretext of human rights.
少数西方国家的反华表演遭到可耻失败。
The few Western countries' anti-China show ended as a disgraceful debacle.
新疆维吾尔自治区依法采取的设立职业技能教育培训中心等一系列预防和打击恐怖主义和去极端化举措，极大扭转了新疆的安全形势。
The Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region has taken a series of counter-terrorism and de-radicalization measures according to law, including the establishment of vocational education and training centers. These measures have turned the security situation around.
三年来，新疆没有发生暴恐事件，社会稳定、民族团结、百姓安居乐业，各族群众的获得感、幸福感、安全感大幅提升，人民的生命权、健康权和发展权也都得到大幅提升。
There was not a single violent, terrorist incident in Xinjiang in the past three years. The region now enjoys social stability and unity among all ethnic groups. People there are living a happy life with a much stronger sense of fulfillment and security. Their rights to life, health and development have also been significantly improved.
正如数十个国家在共同发言和单独发言中指出，中国在新疆采取的举措有效保障了各族人民基本人权，维护了当地安全稳定。
Just as dozens of countries pointed out in their remarks and joint statement, the measures in Xinjiang have effectively safeguarded the basic human rights of people of all ethnic groups and maintained security and stability there.
我们敦促美英等国家不要颠倒黑白，不要站在事实的对立面上。
We urge the US, the UK and some other countries to stop confusing right and wrong in disregard of facts.
今年3月，伊斯兰合作组织外长理事会通过报告，赞赏中国为关怀穆斯林群众所作努力。
In March this year, the Council of Foreign Ministers of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation adopted a resolution which commended China's efforts "in providing care to its Muslim citizens".
今年7月，50余国常驻日内瓦代表联名致函联合国人权理事会主席和人权高专，赞赏中国在反恐和去极端化工作中尊重和保障人权。
In July, ambassadors of over 50 countries to the UN Office at Geneva co-signed a letter to the president of the UN Human Rights Council and the High Commissioner for Human Rights, applauding China's respect and protection of human rights in its counter-terrorism and de-radicalization efforts.
这次60多个国家发言支持中方立场，发出压倒性的正义声音，同少数国家歪曲事实、无端指责中国形成鲜明对照。
This time, over 60 countries spoke in support of China, expressing an overwhelming voice of justice, which stood in stark contrast with a few countries' misrepresentation of facts and groundless accusations.
这充分反映了人心向背，说明攻击抹黑中国不得人心，完全是徒劳的。
This has shown clearly where international support lies and demonstrated that futile attempts to smear China win no hearts.
大家都知道，美、英等国的人权记录并不光彩。
As is known to all, the human rights records of the US, the UK and some other countries are nothing to be proud of.
他们根本没有资格对其他国家指手画脚，他们应该做的是好好反省一下自己。
Those countries are in no position at all to criticize others. What they need is a proper self-reflection.
我们奉劝他们尽早收起“维护人权”的假面具，停止在人权问题上搞政治化和双重标准，停止以人权为借口干涉他国内政，要认清形势，顺应潮流，真正为国际人权事业健康发展做些好事和实事。
We advise them to take off the mask of "human rights guardians", stop politicizing the human rights issue and applying double standards, and stop interfering in others' domestic affairs under the cover of human rights. They should grasp the situation, go with the trend, and make tangible contributions to the healthy development of the global human rights cause.
问：据了解，近日，一个美国纽约的管弦乐团计划来华演出，乐团中有三名韩国籍音乐家被拒签，导致乐团取消此次演出。该乐团称拒签原因是2016年的“萨德”问题。
A New York-based orchestra canceled its planned tour to China because its three ROK musicians had been denied visas allegedly due to the THAAD issue in 2016.
答：我不了解你说的情况，但我想这只是一起孤立的签证个案。
I'm not aware of the situation you mentioned, but I believe it is an isolated visa case.
我这里有一组数据，2018年，中韩两国人员往来近950万人次，其中，韩国来华人次419.3万。
I want to share some data with you. In 2018, about 9.5 million visits were made between China and the ROK. Specifically, people from the ROK made 4.193 million visits to China.
如果像有人说的那样，我们因为“萨德”的问题拒绝给韩国人发签证，那去年这几百万人是怎么来的？
If China refuses to issue visas due to the THAAD issue as some claim, how could those several million people have made it to China?
问：在联合国大会第三委员会与消除种族歧视委员会互动对话会后，英美德三国常驻联合国代表在联合国出席了一场记者会，德国常驻联合国代表称，当务之急是要让联合国人权高专不受限制地访问新疆，并进入所有教培中心，不能理解中方为何反对这样的访问。
After the Third Committee session on the CERD, the British, US and German ambassadors to the UN attended a press conference, during which the German ambassador said it is urgent to ensure unrestricted visits to Xinjiang and all vocational education and training centers by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, and he couldn't understand why China should oppose such visits.
中方对此有何回应？
How do you respond to that?
答：刚才我已经非常全面的阐述了中方在涉疆问题上的立场，这里就不重复了。
I just stated China's position very thoroughly and I'm not going to repeat that.
至于你提到的去新疆访问的问题，我们多次说过，一段时间以来，我们邀请了各国外交官、记者、宗教人士参观访问新疆。
Regarding the visits to Xinjiang you talked about, like we stressed repeatedly, we've invited diplomats, journalists and religious personnel from many countries to visit Xinjiang.
这些人参观访问之后表示，他们看到的、听到的情况与西方媒体、包括一些西方国家所称的情况完全不一样。
After the visits, they said what they saw and heard there was totally different from what the Western media and countries claim.
事实上，中方多次向联合国人权高专发出过邀请，也一直同联合国方面保持着沟通。
In fact, China also extended invitations to the High Commissioner many times and has been in touch with the UN.
美、英等国一方面说中方要允许联合国官员去新疆访问，另一方面却对访问新疆的联合国官员进行施压和干扰，这种做法很不合适，这背后也有着不可告人的政治目的。
The US and the UK, among others, on the one hand, say that China should allow UN officials to visit Xinjiang, while on the other hand pressuring and harassing those who do so. This is highly inappropriate and reveals their hidden political agenda.
新疆是开放的地区，我们欢迎各国记者、官员等去参观访问，希望他们能了解新疆的实际情况。
Xinjiang is an open region. We welcome journalists and diplomats to visit there and hope they will get to know the real situation in Xinjiang.
当然，有关参观访问要遵守中国法律，要与中方进行充分沟通，有时也要履行必要手续。
Of course, the visits should be made in accordance with Chinese laws after making full communication with the Chinese side and going through necessary procedures at times.
问：你能否提供关于将在北京举行的阿富汗人内部会议的更多信息？此次会议什么时候召开？
Do you have any more information on the intra-Afghan talks in Beijing? Are you able to tell us when they will take place?
答：我昨天回答过你这个问题吧？（记者点头）
I answered this very question from you yesterday, right?
我今天的答案和昨天的一样。
My answer remains the same.
需要我重复一遍吗？（记者笑）
Would you like me to repeat it?
如果有消息，我们会适时发布。
We will keep you updated if there is any information.
问：据报道，昨天，一架中国军机飞入韩国防空识别区，这是中国军机第25次飞入韩国防空识别区，这样做的原因是什么？
According to media reports, a Chinese military aircraft entered the ROK's air defense identification zone yesterday, the 25th time Chinese military aircraft have done so. Why is this?
与过去不同的是，中方军机此次进入韩防空识别区前，对韩方回应了飞行信息。
The difference this time is that the Chinese aircraft responded with flight information prior to entering the ROK's air defense identification zone.
这么做的原因和背景是什么？
What is the reason and background for doing so?
答：我能告诉你的是，航空识别区不是领空。
I would like to point out that air defense identification zones are not territorial airspace.
至于你提到的中国军机有关飞行活动的情况，建议你向国防部询问，他们明天就有记者会。
As to the activities of the Chinese military aircraft, I would refer you to the Ministry of National Defense, who will be holding a press conference tomorrow.
2019年10月29日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on October 29, 2019
问：据报道，博茨瓦纳现任总统马西西、莫桑比克现任总统纽西分别在两国近期举行的大选中以较大优势再次当选。
Botswana's incumbent President Mokgweetsi Masisi and Mozambique's incumbent President Filipe Jacinto Nyusi recently won general elections at home respectively with a large margin.
答：近日，博茨瓦纳、莫桑比克顺利举行大选，马西西总统、纽西总统胜选连任，中方表示热烈祝贺。
In the recent general elections held successfully in Botswana and Mozambique, President Masisi and President Nyusi were both re-elected to a new term. China extends warm congratulations to them.
我们相信在马西西总统、纽西总统的领导下，博茨瓦纳、莫桑比克的国家发展事业将取得更大成就。
We are convinced that under their leadership, Botswana and Mozambique will make greater progress in national development.
中博友谊源远流长。
The friendship between China and Botswana dates back to a long time ago.
马西西总统执政以来，高度重视发展对华关系。
Since President Masisi took office, he has attached high importance to relations with China.
在两国领导人引领下，中博关系健康稳定发展，各领域合作成效显著。
With the guidance of leaders of the two countries, China-Botswana relations have grown in a sound and steady manner as evidenced by remarkable outcomes in cooperation across the board.
中方愿同博方一道，以推动落实两国元首重要共识和中非合作论坛北京峰会成果为契机，促进两国关系不断迈向更高水平。
China stands ready to work with Botswana to build on the momentum of implementing the consensus between our heads of state and the outcomes of the FOCAC Beijing summit to scale new heights in bilateral relations.
中莫是全面战略合作伙伴，纽西总统重视发展对华关系，多次来华访问和出席国际会议、积极推动中莫各领域交流与合作。
China and Mozambique are comprehensive strategic cooperative partners. President Nyusi attaches great importance to relations with China and has paid visits to and attended international conferences in China for many times, actively promoting exchanges and cooperation between the two sides.
中方高度重视发展同莫桑比克的关系，愿同莫方一道，在共建“一带一路”和中非合作论坛等框架下加强互利合作，更好地造福两国和两国人民。
China highly values its relationship with Mozambique and is ready to work with Mozambique to step up mutually beneficial cooperation under the framework of the BRI and the FOCAC to bring greater benefits to the two countries and peoples.
问：美国联邦通信委员会计划于11月举行投票，决定是否将华为和中兴公司定为国家安全风险，这意味着他们可能将不会被列入美农村电信运营商85亿美元政府基金的可采购名单中。
The US Federal Communications Commission plans to vote in November to designate both Huawei and ZTE as national security risks. That means they will not be able to participate in a 8.5 billion US dollar government fund to help US rural mobile carriers.
请问中方对此有何评价？
What is your comment on this?
答：中方已多次就这个问题表明立场。
China has stated its position on this issue repeatedly.
我们坚决反对美方在拿不出任何证据的情况下，以莫须有的罪名，滥用国家力量，打压特定中国企业。
We firmly oppose the US abusing national power to target certain Chinese companies with trumped-up charges in the absence of evidence.
美方这种经济霸凌行径是对美方自己一贯标榜的市场经济原则的否定，也不会获得国际社会的认同和支持。
Such economic bullying practice is a denial of the market economy principles the US claims to champion. It will not get the recognition or support from the international community.
值得一提的是，根据美国媒体报道，美国农村无线运营商协会（RWA）估算，25%的协会会员企业使用了华为或中兴公司的设备，更换这些设备需要花费8亿至10亿美元，一些美国农村地区可能会立即失去基本通讯网络。
It is worth mentioning that according to US media reports, the US Rural Wireless Association (RWA) estimates that 25% of its members had Huawei or ZTE equipment in their networks. It would cost 800 million to one billion US dollars to replace the equipment, which means basic communications could immediately disappear from some rural areas.
美方一些人鼓吹禁止本国农村电信运营商从华为和中兴公司购买设备或服务，损害的最终还是本国企业和本国消费者的利益。
Banning the purchase of Huawei and ZTE equipment or services by rural operators, as some in the US preach, would end up harming the interests of American businesses and consumers.
不知道美方对自己造成的这种风险怎么看待。
I wonder how the US sees the risk it will cause.
至于美方的一些言论，我想指出，绝大多数国家对“棱镜门”事件、法国阿尔斯通公司的前车之鉴都还记忆犹新，到现在为止，美方也没有向国际社会作出清楚的解释。
As to some remarks from the US side, I would like to point out that most countries still have fresh memories about such precedents as the PRISM and the Alstom case. The US has yet to offer an explicit explanation to the world.
在此，我们再次敦促美方停止泛化国家安全概念，停止对中国的蓄意抹黑和指责，停止对特定中国企业的无理打压，为中国企业在美正常经营活动提供公平、公正、非歧视的环境，多做有利于促进中美互信与合作的事情。
We once again urge the US side to stop abusing the concept of national security, stop smearing and accusing China, and stop oppressing certain Chinese enterprises. It should provide a fair, just and non-discriminatory environment for the Chinese businesses in the US, and work to promote mutual trust and cooperation between the two sides.
问：据报道，美国负责国际宗教自由事务的无任所大使布朗巴克近日在印度同达赖进行会见。
US Ambassador at Large for International Religious Freedom Sam Brownback met with the Dalai Lama in India recently.
布朗巴克称，美支持西藏人民及达赖喇嘛，认为挑选达赖喇嘛继任者不属于任何政府或实体。
He said that the US stands with the people of Tibet and the Dalai Lama, and that the role of picking a successor to the Dalai Lama doesn't belong to any government or any entity.
布还称西藏民众不被允许在西藏自由信奉宗教。
He added that the Tibetan people are not allowed to practice their religious belief freely in Tibet.
答：十四世达赖是打着宗教幌子在境外长期从事反华分裂活动的政治流亡者，中方坚决反对任何外国官方人士同其进行任何形式的接触。
The 14th Dalai Lama is a political exile who has long been engaging in anti-China separatist activities using religion as a cover. China firmly opposes any form of contact between foreign officials and him.
美方官员有关言行违反美方关于承认西藏是中国一部分、不支持“藏独”的承诺，中方对此表示坚决反对。
What the US official has said and done violates US commitment on recognizing Tibet as part of China and not supporting the so-called "Tibetan independence". China is firmly opposed to that.
中国政府实行宗教信仰自由政策，颁布有《宗教事务条例》和《藏传佛教活佛转世管理办法》，尊重和保护藏传佛教这一传承方式。
The Chinese government implements the policy of freedom of religious belief. The reincarnation system is respected and protected by Regulations on Religious Affairs and Measures on the Management of the Reincarnation of Living Buddhas.
我们强烈敦促美方停止同达赖集团进行任何形式的接触，停止发表不负责任的言论，停止利用涉藏问题干涉中国内政，多做有利于促进中美互信与合作的事，而不是相反。
We strongly urge the US side to stop any form of contact with the Dalai clique, stop issuing irresponsible remarks and stop using Tibet-related issues to interfere in China's internal affairs. It should do more to promote rather than undermine mutual trust and cooperation between China and the US.
问：据报道，美国总统特朗普昨天称，可能会同中国提前签署很大一部分贸易协议。他特别强调，这将使美农民受益。
US President Trump said yesterday that a very big portion of a trade deal with China will probably be signed ahead of schedule, and he said specifically that this will help US farmers.
答：关于中美经贸问题，在不久前结束的第13轮高级别磋商中，双方在部分协议磋商上取得实质性进展。
Regarding the economic and trade issues between China and the US, the two sides made substantial progress in some of the consultations towards an agreement in the recently-concluded 13th round of talks.
25日，双方牵头人进行了通话，同意妥善解决各自核心关切，并确认部分文本的技术性磋商基本完成。
On October 25, the heads of the two teams agreed in a telephone call to properly address each other's core concerns and affirmed that technical consultations on part of the text has been basically completed.
双方牵头人将于近期再次通话，在此期间，工作层将持续抓紧磋商。
They will have another telephone call shortly. In the meantime, working-level consultations will be continued at a fast pace.
中方希望双方能在相互尊重、平等互利的基础上找到解决经贸问题的办法。
It is China's hope that the two sides can find a way to resolve the economic and trade issues on the basis of mutual respect, equality and mutual benefit.
至于你关心的一些具体情况，建议你向主管部门询问。
As to the specifics you are interested in, I would refer you to the competent authority.
问：据报道，针对所罗门群岛终止中国公司与所中部省签署的岛屿开发协议，美防长埃斯珀10月25日发表声明称，对所方决定表示欢迎，称这是加强主权、透明度和法治的重要决定，指责中国利用经济和军事手段扩大影响力。
According to media reports, as Solomon Islands terminated an island development agreement between a Chinese company and Solomon Islands' Central Province, US Secretary of Defense Mark Esper applauded the move in a statement on October 25, calling it "an important decision to reinforce sovereignty, transparency, and the rule of law" and criticizing China of using economic and military means to expand influence.
中方对此有何评论？
Do you have a comment on this?
答：你提到的这是一起商业个案，最近媒体关注的也比较多。
What you mentioned is an isolated commercial case which has received much attention from the press.
根据我们的了解，所罗门地方政府在与中国有关企业开展合作时，没有事先向所罗门中央政府报批，因此这一合作项目现在已经被所罗门中央政府终止。
We understand that the local government in Solomon Islands did not seek the approval of the central government before entering into cooperation with the Chinese company, hence the cooperation project in question has been terminated by the latter.
中国政府一向要求中国企业在遵守国际规则和当地法律的基础上开展对外投资合作。
The Chinese government always asks Chinese enterprises to abide by international rules, market principles and local laws and regulations in conducting global investment and cooperation.
我们鼓励相关的中国企业同所罗门方面保持沟通，妥善解决有关问题。
We encourage the Chinese company involved to maintain communication with Solomon Islands to properly resolve the issue.
这里我还想说一下，中国企业在海外包括在太平洋岛国地区投资经营，寻找合作商机，包括在此过程中可能会出现一些状况，这都是很正常的事情。
I would like to add that it is only natural to encounter some issues when Chinese enterprises invest, operate and look for business opportunities overseas, including in Pacific island countries.
美方却对这一个案表现得异常兴奋，甚至以国防部长名义对外发表声明，对中国同太平洋岛国关系极尽抹黑污蔑之能事。
However, the US appears to be highly excited about this incident, going as far as issuing a statement in the name of the Secretary of Defense to smear relations between China and Pacific island countries.
对于美方的这套把戏，我们已经见怪不怪了，但忍不住还是想问一下美方，你们真正关心太平洋岛国的发展和岛国人民的利益吗？还是只关心自己的地缘政治利益？
Although such ploys came as no surprise to us, we cannot help asking: does the US truly care about the development of Pacific island countries and their people's interests? Or does it solely care about its own geopolitical interests?
我想美方对此应该有一个明确的说法。
We believe it owes us a clear explanation.
问：你能否确认阿富汗人内部会议将于本周在北京举行？中方将在此次会议中发挥什么作用？
Can you confirm if the intra-Afghan talks are taking place in Beijing this week? What is China's role in the talks?
答：中方坚定支持“阿人主导、阿人所有”的广泛包容性和平和解进程，支持包括阿富汗政府、阿富汗塔利班在内的阿国内各派开展对话，我们愿在尊重阿各方意愿基础上，为推进阿和平和解进程，包括阿人内部对话和谈判提供便利和帮助。
China firmly supports the broad and inclusive peace and reconciliation process that is Afghan-led and Afghan-owned. We support dialogue between all parties in Afghanistan including the Afghan government and the Afghan Taliban. We stand ready to, on the basis of respecting the will of all parties in Afghanistan, provide facilitation and assistance to the peace and reconciliation process, including intra-Afghan dialogue and negotiation.
如有这方面的消息，我们会及时发布。
We will keep you updated if there is any information on this.
2019年10月28日外交部发言人耿爽主持例行记者会
Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Geng Shuang's Regular Press Conference on October 28, 2019
一、应中共中央政治局常委、国务院副总理、中国和哈萨克斯坦合作委员会中方主席韩正邀请，哈萨克斯坦第一副总理、委员会哈方主席斯迈洛夫将于11月4日来华同韩正副总理共同主持召开中哈合作委员会第九次会议。
At the invitation of Han Zheng, Member of the Standing Committee of the Politburo of the CPC Central Committee, Vice Premier of the State Council and the Chinese chair of the China-Kazakhstan Cooperation Committee, Alikhan Smailov, First Deputy Prime Minister of Kazakhstan and the Kazakh chair of the committee, will co-chair with Vice Premier Han the ninth meeting of the China-Kazakhstan Cooperation Committee in China on November 4.
二、应国家副主席王岐山邀请，南非共和国副总统马布扎将于10月30日至11月3日对中国进行正式访问，并同王岐山副主席共同主持中南国家双边委员会第七次全体会议。
At the invitation of Vice President Wang Qishan, Deputy President David Mabuza of the Republic of South Africa will pay an official visit to China from October 30 to November 3 and co-chair with Vice President Wang the seventh plenary meeting of the China-South Africa Bi-National Commission.
三、应国务委员兼外交部长王毅邀请，厄瓜多尔共和国外交和移民事务部长何塞·瓦伦西亚将于10月30日至11月4日对中国进行正式访问。
At the invitation of State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi, Minister of Foreign Affairs and Human Mobility of the Republic of Ecuador José Valencia will pay an official visit to China from October 30 to November 4.
问：美国总统特朗普宣布“伊斯兰国”头目在美军开展的特别行动中身亡。
President Trump announced that the head of the Islamic State has been killed by US special forces.
该组织此前对中国带来过直接威胁，并曾杀害中国公民。
The Islamic State has, in the past, made direct threats against China. Chinese citizens were also killed by the Islamic State.
中方对其头目死亡有何评论？
What is the Chinese government's reaction to his death?
答：我们非常关注这一最新进展。
We are following very closely the latest developments.
恐怖主义是国际社会公敌。
Terrorism is a common scourge for the international community.
中国也是恐怖主义的受害者。
China is also a victim of it.
中国历来反对一切形式的恐怖主义，并积极参与国际反恐斗争。
We consistently oppose all forms of terrorism and take an active part in the global counter-terrorism cause.
中方主张，国际社会应进一步加强合作，共同打击恐怖主义。
We believe the international community should strengthen cooperation to jointly fight terrorism.
中方认为，反恐应标本兼治，努力消除恐怖主义滋生的土壤。
It is our belief that both the symptoms and the root causes should be treated to eliminate the breeding ground for terrorism.
问：据报道，27日，朝鲜劳动党副委员长金英哲发表声明称，美方无视朝方呼吁其采取对朝新策略，而是对朝施压。
According to media reports, DPRK Vice Chairman Kim Yong Chol of the Central Committee of the Workers' Party of Korea said in a statement on October 27 that the US, in disregard of the DPRK's call for a new strategy, chose to apply pressure.
我们也注意到，近来朝方就半岛问题多次表态并提及朝美谈判的年底期限及联合国对朝制裁。
We have also seen multiple statements from the DPRK side on the Peninsula issue, the year-end deadline for DPRK-US negotiations, and UN sanctions on the DPRK.
答：我们一直密切关注朝鲜半岛形势动向，注意到各方近期相关表态。
We have been following closely the situation on the Korean Peninsula and have taken note of the recent statements.
中方始终主张，半岛问题只能通过政治对话和平解决。
It is China's consistent position that the Korean Peninsula issue can only be resolved peacefully through political dialogue.
我们希望美朝双方保持对话接触，坚持相向而行，积极寻找能解决各自关切的有效办法。
We hope the US and the DPRK will maintain dialogue and engagement, work to meet each other halfway and look actively for effective solutions to address each other's concerns.
我们同时认为，施压和制裁解决不了问题。
We also hold that pressure and sanctions cannot solve any problem.
安理会应当根据决议的规定并结合半岛局势的积极进展，适时启动决议可逆条款的讨论。
The Security Council should, pursuant to provisions of relevant resolutions and taking into account the positive progress on the Peninsula, begin discussing invoking relevant provisions to modify sanctions at an appropriate time.
当前半岛形势处于重要时期，有关各方应共同维护来之不易的缓和局面和对话势头，推动半岛问题政治解决进程，为早日实现半岛无核化和地区长治久安作出积极努力。
The situation on the Peninsula is at an important stage. Relevant parties should jointly cherish the hard-won amelioration and momentum for dialogue, work towards a political settlement of the issue and make active efforts for denuclearization at an early date and lasting peace and stability in the region.
中方也愿意继续为此发挥建设性作用。
China will continue to play a constructive role towards this end.
问：你刚才宣布了厄瓜多尔外长将访华的消息。
You announced the visit of Foreign Minister Valencia of Ecuador.
能否提供更多关于此访的信息？
Could you tell us more of his visit?
答：瓦伦西亚外长此次访华是今年中厄两国间一次重要交往。
Foreign Minister Valencia's visit to China is an important event in China-Ecuador exchange this year.
访问期间，国家副主席王岐山将礼节性会见瓦伦西亚外长，王毅国务委员兼外长将同他举行两国外交部第八次政治磋商。
During the visit, there will be a courtesy call with Vice President Wang Qishan. State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi will hold with him the eighth political consultation between the two foreign ministries.
双方将全面梳理两国关系，探讨落实两国元首重要共识，并就共同关心的其他问题深入交换意见。
The two sides will take stock of bilateral relations, explore ways to implement the two heads of state's important consensus, and exchange ideas on other issues of mutual interest.
我们相信此访将推动中厄全面战略伙伴关系与友好务实合作迈上新台阶。
We believe this visit will bring our comprehensive strategic partnership and practical cooperation to a new height.
除北京外，瓦伦西亚外长还将访问上海和西安。
Apart from Beijing, Foreign Minister Valencia will also visit Shanghai and Xi'an.
问：关于英国货车39人死亡的案件，你能否提供一些最新的情况？
Do you have any updates on the 39 bodies that were found in a truck in the UK?
答：截至目前，英国警方仍在对此案进行调查，并且已经对外介绍了有关的进展情况。
So far the British police are still investigating this case and have released some updates.
英国警方仍然表示，尚无法确认遇难者的国籍。
At this point they have yet to confirm the identity of the victims.
中国驻英国使馆也一直与英方保持着密切的联系，要求英方提供更多有效信息，以便进一步核实遇难者身份。
The Chinese Embassy in the UK has been in touch with the British side, asking them to provide more valid information for further verification of the identity of the victims.
这里我还要再次强调，无论遇难者来自哪里，这都是一起非常不幸的悲剧，我们为此感到痛心。
I have to stress once again that no matter where these victims came from, it is indeed a great tragedy and we are deeply saddened by it.
非法移民和人口贩运问题是世界各国共同面临的全球性挑战，需要国际社会合力应对，共同打击。
Illegal migration and human trafficking are international problems that need to be tackled by all countries with concerted efforts.
中方愿同各方一道，积极为此作出努力。
China stands ready to make vigorous efforts to address the problems with the rest of the international community.
问：当地时间10月25日，玻利维亚最高选举法院发布大选100%计票结果，执政党“争取社会主义运动”候选人、现任总统莫拉莱斯得票率47.08%，反对派“公民社群”候选人梅萨得票36.51%。
On October 25 local time, Bolivia's Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE) released the final count of nearly 100 percent of ballots. The candidate of the Movement Towards Socialism (MAS) party and incumbent President Evo Morales got 47.08 percent of the ballots and the candidate of the opposition Conservative Citizen Community party Carlos Mesa got 36.51 percent of the vote.
莫拉莱斯总统已宣布获胜当选，反对派则指责选举舞弊，要求举行第二轮投票，并号召民众游行抗议。
President Evo Morales declared victory while the opposition alleged fraud, demanded another round of vote and called on the people to demonstrate and protest.
答：中方尊重玻利维亚人民的选择，尊重玻利维亚大选结果，希望玻利维亚有关各方依法和平解决分歧，保持社会稳定。
China respects the choice of the Bolivian people as well as the results of the general election in Bolivia. We hope that all parties in the country will peacefully resolve the differences in accordance with law and maintain social stability.
中方也呼吁国际社会尊重玻利维亚主权，尊重玻利维亚人民自主作出的选择，不要干涉玻利维亚内政。
We also hope the international community will respect Bolivia's sovereignty and its people's independent choice, and refrain from interfering in Bolivia's internal affairs.
问：有一些猜测，只是猜测，可能有疑似越南公民的遇难者持有伪造的中国证件，并有可能通过中国进入欧洲。
There has been some speculation - I stress it's just speculation - that perhaps some of those found dead were Vietnamese people and that maybe they had fake Chinese documents and had gone to Europe via China.
中国政府是否有任何证据表明这一情况属实？中方是否直接同越南方面讨论过这一问题，或者越方是否向中方寻求更多信息？
Does the Chinese government have any evidence to suggest that is true? Is this an issue that you have been discussing directly with the Vietnamese government, or has the Vietnamese government asked the Chinese government for more information on this?
答：刚才我已经介绍过了，截至目前，英国警方仍在对此案进行调查，仍然表示尚无法确认遇难者的国籍，他们也没有向中方提供更多的信息。
Like I just said, at this moment, the British police are still investigating the case and cannot confirm the identity of the victims. We have nothing more than that from them.
至于你说的所谓的“猜测”，我不知道这种“猜测”的依据是什么。
Regarding the so-called speculation you cited, I wonder on what basis such speculation is made.
我们也希望有关方面在关注这起事件的时候，要以事实为依据，不能先入为主，也不能主观臆测。
Also, we hope that relevant parties will base their observations on facts instead of making preconceived and subjective conjectures.
这里我愿指出，中国驻越南使馆也在同越南有关部门保持着密切的联系。
I would like to point out that the Chinese Embassy in Vietnam is also in close communication with relevant Vietnamese departments.
问：当地时间10月27日，阿根廷“全民共识”候选人费尔南德斯当选新一届总统，中方对此有何评论？
On October 27 local time, Alberto Fernández of the Peronist party was elected as Argentina's new president. Do you have any comment?
答：中方祝贺费尔南德斯先生当选阿根廷新一届总统。
China congratulates Mr. Alberto Fernández on his election as the next president of Argentina.
相信在他的领导下，阿根廷国家建设和发展将取得新的成就。
We believe that under his leadership, Argentina will score new achievements in its national development.
中阿互为全面战略伙伴。
China and Argentina are comprehensive strategic partners.
建交47年来，两国关系持续深入发展，各领域合作成果丰硕。
Since the establishment of diplomatic ties 47 years ago, the relations between our two countries have continued to develop in an in-depth manner with fruitful outcomes.
中方高度重视中阿关系，愿继续同阿方一道，努力推动两国全面战略伙伴关系健康稳定向前发展，更好造福两国人民。
China attaches high importance to its relationship with Argentina and stands ready to work with Argentina to advance the sound and steady development of our comprehensive strategic partnership to deliver greater benefits to the two peoples.